2022 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2) | 978-1-6654-8561-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISC255366.2022.9922404

XRouting: Explainable Vehicle Rerouting for Urban
Road Congestion Avoidance using Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Zheng Wang

Shen Wang

Beijing-Dublin International College
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
zheng.wang@ucdconnect.ie

School of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin, Ireland
shen.wang@ucd.ie

Abstract—Rerouting vehicles for urban congestion avoidance
is challenging as the decision has to be undertaken promptly
with the consideration of traffic condition changes caused by
other vehicles’ routing plans. Existing solutions such as the
on-board navigation systems (e.g., Google Maps) cannot meet
these requirements which is prone to trigger the well-known
routing oscillation problem. Though deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) approaches are able to provide a high-quality solution
and satisfy the real-time requirement, not only do they usually
suffer the slow and instability issues for convergence, but the
input information, like a picture for each time step, is also
teeming with redundant information. In this paper, we propose
XRouting model that uses policy-based DRL and the revised
Gated Transformer (GTr) architecture to accelerate and stabilize
the training convergence in solving dynamic routing problems.
Our simulation study validates that compared with existing
rerouting solutions, XRouting can achieve higher reductions in
travel time, fuel consumption, CO2 emission, and the route length.
More importantly, XRouting is capable of determining which
features are predominant when vehicles conduct rerouting. This
explainable ability of our model can further guide human drivers
what features to consider when rerouting manually in real life.

I. INTRODUCTION
Drivers often need to change their pre-planned routes to
avoid potential congestion due to the changing urban road
traffic condition. It is a challenging decision-making process as
an effective vehicle re-routing often requires a timely response
with high-frequency traffic condition prediction. A timely
response can ensure that any suggested re-routing plan can be
well taken before missing chances when vehicles pass through
incoming intersections. The high-frequency traffic prediction
can help mitigate the potential routing oscillation problem
as shown in Fig.1. However, such a high-quality prediction
demands high computation (i.e., compute a collection of
optimal routes for multiple vehicles) and communication (i.e.,
to exchange routing decisions of surrounding vehicles) costs
thus it cannot be provided promptly. Similarly, if we impose
the short time limit, the re-routing solution will likely not be
effective.
Traditional methods such as the onboard navigation systems
(e.g., Google Maps) use the shortest pathfinding algorithms

After a while...

Too congested on the
right, let's take the left!

Road junction

After a while...

Too congested on the
left, let's take the right!

Road segment

Again...

Vehicle running from left to right

Fig. 1. An illustration of routing oscillation problem. This shows an
inappropriate re-routing strategy is likely to cause a long-term congestion
due to routing oscillation.

(e.g., Dijkstra’s algorithm) to update the route with the current
traffic conditions. Due to the lack of consideration of other vehicles’ re-routing decisions and therefore the near future traffic
condition, research has demonstrated that with the increasing
penetration rate of this system, the re-routing effectiveness gets
worse. Recent methods such as next road re-routing [1] rely
on the heuristic function which could lead to an unbounded
worst solution when applied in different scenarios.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approaches have recently shown substantial potential in solving problems that are
computationally intractable such as AlphaGo [2]. Koh et al.
[3] and Geng et al. [4] also tried to utilize the deep Q network
(DQN) model for vehicle re-routing to avoid road congestions.
However, this approach has only been applied to one vehicle
under light traffic conditions. Therefore it is still unclear if
this solution has positive implications for alleviate the routing
oscillation issue.
Furthermore, transformer has been exhibiting extraordinary
talents in both natural language processing problems [5], [6]
and computer vision problems [7] in recent years. In virtue
of the excellent performance of transformer in dealing with
the sequential problem, the attention mechanism used in its

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

encoder-decoder structure is also exploited in reinforcement
learning to solve NP-hard optimization problems including
Travelling Salesman Problems (TSP) [8], and Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) [9]. However, most of the previous
transformer-based DRL model used in NP-hard optimization problems concentrates on nodes’ information rather than
edges, which is distinguished from the real world scenario of
vehicle rerouting problem. The most decisive information of
the latter one is usually provided by current roads rather than
intersections. Moreover, it is common that there are multiple
roads connecting to a same intersection in the real world,
which encourages us to utilize the roads’ information for
solving real-time rerouting problems.
Then, in this paper, we propose a new DRL-based re-routing
system called XRouting to fill the aforementioned gaps. Our
contributions are summarized as follows:
• Firstly, XRouting has a more stable convergence with
less training time. Our model regards all the roads as
an ordered sequence rather than mixing all the features
together or a picture with enormous redundant information. Compared with the state-of-the-art DQN model,
our approach uses policy-based DRL - Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [10] and the revised Transformer
architecture [11] to obtain a faster and more stable
convergence in training. Besides, unlike the traditional
routing problem [12] which usually neglects the relative
position information of the input observation, our model
incorporates position encoding component by interpreting
the distance between the current position of the vehicle
and the destination.
• Secondly, the effectiveness of XRouting has been
validated in a more realistic scenario. Compared with
the other competing DRL approach [3], our testing environment has 10 more roads and 100 more traffic trips
in average. Instead of single lane for each road, our
scenario defines two lanes for each road. Moreover, we
also include the impact that traffic lights have on routing
decision process. Besides, XRouting is evaluated under
multiple vehicles showing the high robustness to the
well-known routing oscillation problem, rather than just
evaluating one single vehicle.
• Thirdly, the explainability of XRouting is also demonstrated with the decomposition of the routing process.
Specifically, we propose a general method to visualize
the feature values under each automated decision process.
We have sampled approximately 2000 cases in average
to reveal that when choosing the next turn among four or
three choices, road’s average speed and vehicle density
are the most two significant factors to be considered by
DRL agents. This result is particularly useful, because the
human drivers are capable of learning from the simulation
before XRouting puts into practice. Last but not least,
we have shared our implementation of XRouting at1 for
others to replicate.
1 https://github.com/ZKBig/XRouting

II. R ELATED W ORKS
Vehicle rerouting occurs normally when traffic is changing
unexpectedly. Pan et al. [13] proposed five different rerouting strategies based on the traditional shortest pathfinding
algorithm with traffic predictions. However, there is no clear
winner among those five rerouting strategies. Moreover, with
the growth of penetration rate, those rerouting methods get
worse, which hinders potential large-scale applications. A
similar trend was found in [1]. Besides, NRR proposed in
[1] is based on a heuristic solution which is likely to cause
unbounded worse solutions when applied in unknown urban
areas.
The DRL approach can provide high-quality solutions even
when the problem was computationally intractable such as
AlphaGo [2]. Koh et al. [3] starts to use value-based DQN
to reroute vehicles. Another similar DRL approach [4] is also
used for improving pedestrian traffic. However, those attempts
are in a relatively early stage and are tested in oversimplified
scenarios with only one agent applied. Explainable multi agent
path finding has been demonstrated in a recent work [14] for
collision avoidance. There is a need to extend explainable AI
to vehicle rerouting for guiding human drivers to avoid enroute congestion.
The XRouting proposed in this paper tries to fill the gaps
mentioned above to improve the practicability and effectiveness of rerouting vehicles for congestion avoidance with more
stability and explainable ability.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
This section elaborates the design of our proposed XRouting
including the modelling of state, action, and reward, the selection of the PPO algorithm, and the adaption of Transformer
architecture to the vehicle re-routing problem.
A. State, Action, and Reward
The agent in our model is a single vehicle. In the training
stage, XRouting trains the policy function of a single vehicle
that learns how to choose the next road given a certain state
in the environment. The environment is indeed the urban road
network with changing traffic. In the evaluation stage, the
trained policy function is applied to multiple vehicles to test its
effectiveness in congestion avoidance. Specifically, the design
of state, action and reward are described as follows.
State: The observation space defined in our model incorporates the following two parts:
• Road Attributes: The attributes of each road can be
separated into dynamic part and static part. The former
one contains three elements including the average speed
of each road vavr , the vehicle density (the number of
vehicles divided by the road length) of each road dveh ,
and the average travel time (the road length divided
by the average vehicle speed vavr ) of each road tavr .
The latter one represents the inherent geographical
information including the Euclidean distance between
the start point of each road and that of the destination
road, which is denoted by disaim , as the green line

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

depicts in the Fig 2. Another static attribute is used
to distinguish the destination road and other roads in
virtue of one-hot encoding. The value of the destination
road is 1 while other roads are set to 0. Consequently,
the road attributes can be described as a five-tuple:
[vavr , dveh , tavr , disaim , 1/0].
•

crossing each road.

Vehicle-Road Attributes: The Vehicle-Road Attributes
imply the relative position information between the DRL
vehicle and each road. To be specific, it is comprised of
two parts: the first part represents the real-time distance
between the current DRL vehicle and the destination road
crossing certain road, which is given by
disveh

aim

= disveh

road

+ lroad + disroad

aim ,

(1)

where disveh road is the Euclidean distance between the
position of the DRL vehicle and the start position of
a certain road; lroad is the length of the corresponding
road to be crossed; disroad aim represents the distance
between the end position of the road and the start
position of the destination road. Therefore, this variable
demonstrates the difference of relative distances between
the DRL vehicle and the destination road by going across
different roads. The red line in the Fig 2 demonstrates
the defined disveh aim if the DRL vehicle goes across
road DC in the future. The second element conveying
position information is angles between the DRL vehicle
and each road, which is shown as the angle α in Fig 2.
In a nutshell, the combination of relative distances and
angle values is capable of depicting the dynamic position
information between the DRL vehicle and each road.
Action: Taking the aim into account that encouraging the
DRL vehicle to make a feasible choice of the next road
with the consideration of the current traffic condition, the
corresponding action space is, then, intuitively defined as the
direction of next turning. However, the size of the action space
is intimately associated with the degree of each intersection,
meaning that the number of action choices for each intersection is essentially different. Therefore, the action space is
defined as the maximum degree value among all intersections
in the network. According to Fig 2, it can be clearly spotted
that the red DRL vehicle has four choices of next roads, which
are denoted by the numbers ranging from 0 to 3.
Reward: The training motivation is to make the DRL
vehicle choose the next road with the minimum travelling
time under the current network circumstance. It is not hard to
envisage that the minimum travelling time is not equivalent to
the minimum road length. Therefore, the corresponding reward
of our model is intuitively given by:
r = Tstart − Tend ,

(2)

This reward r refers to the time difference between the vehicle
stepping into the road Tstart and leaving the road Tend , which
is negative. Then, the training process is literally regarded as
the processing of decreasing the travelling time of DRL vehicle

Fig. 2. The illustration of the state and action of XRouting. The red triangle
is the DRL agent, while the gray one is the non-DRL vehicles.

B. Policy-based DRL
Our XRouting uses a policy-based DRL PPO algorithm
because not only does the trust region method used in PPO
ensure the policy update stability, but also the importance
sampling of PPO provides an adequate sampling rate in
the training process. The existing rerouting approaches use
other value-based methods which have instability problems
and are difficult for convergence in solving vehicle rerouting
problems, especially when the testing scenario becomes much
sophisticated. Moreover, from the engineering perspective, the
PPO algorithm has the advantage of parameter tuning with
relatively high efficiency. Based on the above comparison,
PPO is universally used in various DRL problems with brilliant
and stable performance. Then, the following contents introduce
how XRouting uses PPO in detail.
Assume the route found by DRL vehicle is τ , then the
discountedPreturn of each route τ should be defined as
T −1 t
G (τ ) =
t=0 γ rt+1 . The goal of our model is to find a
policy function that can maximize the total discounted return
(reward) of the process of DRL vehicle finding the complete
route, which can be expressed in the form of expectation as:
π ∗ = argmaxπ

−1
X TX
(
γ t rt+1 )P (τ ),
τ

(3)

t=0

where π ∗ represents the optimal policy function,
and P (τ ) is the trajectory probability of routing
generating
QT −1processes, which is defined as P (τ ) =
P (s0 ) t=0 π(at , st )P (st+1 |at .st ). Based on that, the
state value function can be further defined as:
T
−1
X

V π (st ) = Eπ [

γ t rt+1 |st ]

t=0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(4)

In DRL, the policy function can be approximated by a neural
network with parameter θ denoted by π(a|s; θ). Hence, in
order to get the optimal policy function, policy gradient (PG)
has been utilized sweepingly in virtue of gradient ascend
to update the parameter θ. Then, the policy gradient with
advantage function is given as:
∇J(θ) = Eπθ [∇logπ(at |st ; θ)Aπθ (at , st )],

(5)

where the advantage function Aπθ represents the advantage
of taking action at in the current state st , which is calculated
with the help of the state value function defined in equation (4).
Moreover, equation (5) can be further modified by introducing
importance sampling, which can be expressed as:
∇J(θ) = Eπθ′ [

π(at |st ; θ)
∇logπ(at |st ; θ)Aπθ′ (at , st )], (6)
π(at |st ; θ′ )

The core idea of this modification is to update policy function
′
π θ with the help of the old policy function π θ . To avoid the
large deviation between the two policy functions, trust region
method with clipping is introduced given as:
L(θ) = Eπ [min(
clip(

π(at |st ; θ) πθ′
A (at , st ),
π(at |st ; θ′ )

π(at |st ; θ)
, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθ′ (at , st ))]
π(at |st ; θ′ )

(7)

The hyper parameter ϵ is used to control the size of the
policy updating range, which enhances the stability of training
process.
C. Revised Gated Transformer (GTr) architecture
Based on the above analysis, it is clear that two functions
should be estimated in virtue of neural networks, that is, the
policy function and the state value function. In our model,
both those two functions are represented by the same neural
network whose structure is shown in Fig. 3. As shown in
Fig. 3, the proposed model is based on attention mechanism, in which the predefined attributes of all roads in the
traffic network are the input sequence denoted by E. Note
that for each road, the input attributes contain six elements:
[vavr , dveh , tavr , disaim , angleveh , 0/1], which represents the
feature of each road and the relationship with the vehicle as
aforementioned. The attribute disveh aim is regarded as the
input of the relative position embedding, which is denoted
by P in our model. P implies the relatively priority of each
road, with the help of the distance value, when it comes to the
next road chosen for the rl-vehicle. Another equally important
thing to note is that the input road sequence should be
ascending ordered according to the relative position encoding
to demonstrate the relative position difference of each road.
The dim of E is [1 × 6 × m], and the dim of P is [1 × m],
where m is the total road number.
To improve the stability of training, GRU GateLayer is
used here by replacing the traditional residual connections
[11]. Moreover, two normalization layers are added: one is
before the MHA layer, the other is before the MLP forward-

Fig. 3. The revised Transformer architecture of XRouting, where E represents
the ordered input road attributes sequence, and P is the distance between the
DRL vehicle and the destination with DRL vehicle crossing each road.

ing layer. Then, the mathematical expression of the defined
policy/value network in Fig. 3 can be written as follows:
X = Concat[Embedding(E), Embedding(P )]

(8)

e = M HA(LayerN orm(X))
X

(9)

e
Y = GRU Gate(X, X + X)

(10)

Ye = M LP (LayerN orm(Y ))

(11)

Z = GRU Gate(Y, Y + Ye )

(12)

e = F latten(Z)
Z

(13)

e
π(θ) = M ask(Dense(Z))

e
V (θ) = Dense(Z)

(14)

Note that, the mask is applied to the generated policy
probability results which have the dim of the maximum
edge choices in the overall network, considering the different
number of choices for each intersection. In other words, the
probability values of the redundant choices will be converted
to negative infinity, making them impossible to be chosen by
the DRL vehicle.
IV. E XPERIMENTS D ESIGN
A. Simulation settings
Software and Hardware: The traffic simulation platform
used in our experiments is Simulation of Urban Mobility(SUMO) 1.13.0. The reinforcement learning training tool
used in our experiment is RLlib 1.12.0. The traffic network
environment for training is created based on OpenAI Gym.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 PPO for XRouting
Initial the parameter of policy/value network θ;
for iter = 0, 1, 2,... do
for episode = 1, 2,... M do
Reset traffic trips;
Run policy πθ′ for T time steps and record the
corresponding states and actions;
Compute rewards rt for each time step;
Compute advantage estimates Aπθ′ with the help of
Vπθ′ ;
end
Update the parameter of policy/value network by maximizing the objective function L(θ).
end

The CPU used for training is Intel Core i5 with 1.4 GHz. The
main memory is 8GB.
Scenario: The scenario used in our experiment is a customized Manhattan-like traffic network shown in Fig. 4, in
which the length of each horizontal road is 300 meters and
200 meters for each vertical road. Each road is designed to be
bidirectional with two lanes. The traffic flow is generated as
150 vehicles in total with the help of SUMO randomTrips.py,
and the vehicle load rate is one vehicle per second. At each
intersection the traffic lights, which are controlled by SUMO
default controller, are set in order to approach the real world.
Training stage The DRL agent is trained to find the
minimum time cost route from the predefined initial road (red
mark in Fig. 4) and the destination road (green mark in Fig.
4) in diversified traffic conditions by loading the DRL vehicle
in different time steps. When there is no human driven vehicle
in the network, the new DRL vehicle will not be loaded,
and the next training episode will begin consecutively. The
DRL vehicle will make a choice for the next road after going
across the detector set on each roads when approaching each
intersection.
Evaluation stage The well trained model, or the DRL
vehicle router is applied to multiple DRL vehicles and guide
them to make choices of next edge dynamically. In our
experiment, we set 50% of the original 150 human vehicles to
DRL vehicles. Additionally, because the time of leaving road
and entering road for each vehicle is quite different to each
other, the decision time is set to be equivalent for all the 75
DRL vehicles. By attenuating different time interval, we found
that updating each DRL vehicle’s next road decision every 30
simulation seconds has a relatively better performance, which
is then used in the evaluation stage.
B. Compared methods
To evaluate our proposed DRL model, we compare three
methods that are introduced as follows:
Dijkstra’s Algorithm: Every 30 simulation seconds, we use
Dijkstra’s Algorithm to recompute the routes using the updated
average travel speed on each road.

Fig. 4. Training Scenario

DQN: We applied DQN-based rerouting [3] to the same set
of DRL vehicles as ours XRouting.
PPO: The basic PPO-based model to compare the advantages of the revised Transformer architecture used in our
XRouting.
In terms of hyper-parameter settings, the number of attention head is set to 4 with the dim of each head is 32. The dim
of MLP network is set to 100. The clip parameter ϵ is set to
0.3. The discount factor γ is set to 0.99. The learning rate is
set to 0.0004, and the value loss coefficient is set to 0.00005.
We train our model every 4096 batch size, and for each batch
size, SGD iteration is designed to be conducted 4 times to
update the network parameters. For the compared basic PPO
algorithm, the policy/value network is comprised of two neural
networks with RELU activation function, and the dim of the
two networks are designed to 150 and 100 respectively. The
rest parameters of the normal PPO algorithm, like learning
rate, are set the same as our proposed model. All the three
DRL algorithms are adjusted to be trained for 6500 episodes
in total.
V. E XPERIMENTS RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Algorithm Convergence
Fig 5 illustrates the reward convergence trends of the three
compared DRL algorithms changing with the episodes. Each
algorithm is trained for four epochs. Compared with PPObased model, it is evidently shown that not only does the
DQN-based model vibrate more, but it is also incapable of
finding the optimal route for the DRL vehicle in this relatively
more intractable traffic scenario. On the contrary, The PPO and
XRouting are more stable. It is worth noting that the normal
PPO shows a relatively lower convergent speed compared to
our model. Specifically, our model reaches to -500 at about
2700 episodes in average, while the normal PPO-based model
does not reach to this value until approximately 4000 episodes
in average. With respect to the final reward value, our model
has a slightly higher value compared to the normal PPO model,
meaning that the normal-PPO find the subordinate optimal
route for the DRL vehicle rather than the best one. In a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Explainability: which road feature matters?

Fig. 5. The comparison of the reward convergence with the growing
episodes among XRouting, DQN, and PPO. The shade represents the standard
deviation.

nutshell, our model shows a better performance from either
the stability or the final result perspective.
B. Traffic Impact
Table I shows that our model is capable of decreasing
the average travel time of all vehicles by at most 4.09%
compared to the traditional Dijkstra algorithm. For the
average value of both CO2 emission and fuel consumption,
compared with Dijkstra algorithm, our model saves by
approximately 3.990%, which is nearly more than twice
as many as the reduction resulted from normal PPO-based
algorithm. Additionally, the average mile of route length is
ameliorated by lowering 3.920%, which is fairly astounding.
It is also noted that the DQN-based algorithm shows a quite
bad performance when it applies to multiple vehicles rather
than a single one in [3]. Specifically, all the average values
of the four metrics increase by more than 7.000%, even
deteriorating the original traffic conditions, which reflects the
final convergent value of its reward in Fig. 5. In brief, it is
proved that our proposed model outperforms in all the four
metrics.

TABLE I
T HE COMPARISON OF FOUR RE - ROUTING METHODS IN TERMS OF TRAVEL
TIME , CO 2 EMISSION , FUEL CONSUMPTION , AND ROUTE LENGTH . T HE
PERCENTAGE SHOWN IS COMPARED AGAINST D IJKSTRA .

Travel
Time
(sec)
Dijkstra 123.564
DQN
132.208
+7.000%
PPO
120.015
-2.870%
XRouting 118.509
-4.090%

CO2
(g/s)

Fuel
(ml/s)

312.458
335.328
+7.320%
306.982
-1.750%
299.984
-3.990%

134.314
144.078
+7.270%
132.040
-1.690%
128.953
-3.990%

Route
Length
(m)
944.848
1019.478
+7.900%
929.107
-1.670%
907.766
-3.920%

Fig. 6. The heat map of the normalized value of road attributes, when a DRL
vehicle is at the road C1B1 while making its next road decision among the
road B1B0, B1B2, B1C1, and B1A1 (suggested by XRouting). The x-axis is
the name of road attribute, the y-axis is the road id.

To figure out which road attributes are predominant in a
more intuitive way, the attributes for all roads of a DRL
vehicle road decision trajectory are visualized in Fig. 6 as an
example. Specifically, the DRL vehicle is on the road C1B1
currently, and the next road it chooses is B1A1 which is
marked by the red star. The road attributes rows of other
three choices for the DRL vehicle are marked by orange
rectangles in Fig. 6. It is clear that B1A1 has the minimum
value of the position encoding and end distance among the four
available roads, meaning that crossing B1A1 can endow the
DRL vehicle with the road that is geographically nearest to the
destination, compared with the rest of three roads. Moreover,
B1A1 also has a relatively less travel time value among the
four roads. Nevertheless, it is interestingly found that B1A1
has the maximum value of vehicle density and minimum value
of average speed, which seems that in this decision moment,
the geographical elements have more dominated impact on the
next road choice.
To gain more general insight from statistical perspective,
we collect more than 2000 samples of input observation
information and the corresponding output actions for “four
choices cases” (i.e., when the DRL vehicle has to choose the
next road from four possible ones. The similar conclusion
can be found in “three-choice cases”). We rank the road
attributes of all the candidate road selections for each decision
according to the following rules: ordering the average speed
attribute by numeric value from the largest to the smallest.
Conversely, ordering the rest four attributes from the smallest
to the largest. Finally, find the order value of the road that the
DRL vehicle has chosen. For instance, in Fig. 6, for attribute
position encoding, the ordered result of the road B1A1 is 1,
while the order of attribute average speed is 4. Consequently,
we calculate the main statistics value of all five attributes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ranking for each decision and listed the results in Table II,
while plotting the distribution in Fig. 7.
TABLE II
T HE ORDER

OF EACH INPUT ROAD ATTRIBUTE UNDER FOUR CANDIDATE
NEXT ROAD CHOICES (2037 SAMPLES ). T HE HIGHER VALUE MEANS THE
MORE IMPORTANCE THE ATTRIBUTE IS CONSIDERED FOR A RE - ROUTING
DECISION . T HE PERCENTAGE SHOWS THE PERCENTILE RANKING VALUE .

Attributes
Average Speed
Vehicle Density
Travelling Time
End Distance
Position Encoding

mean
2.345
2.347
2.483
2.550
2.572

25%
1.000
1.000
1.000
2.000
2.000

50%
2.000
2.000
2.000
3.000
3.000

75%
3.000
3.000
4.000
4.000
4.000

Fig. 7. The distribution of ranking values of all road attributes when rerouting among four choices.

According to Table II, we can see that the attribute average
speed ranks the first in both two tales, meaning that it is
the relatively most decisive attribute when it comes to the
next road decision. The following attribute is vehicle density,
travelling time, and end distance. It is worth noting that
position encoding ranks the last. Because position encoding
represented by disveh aim as aforementioned, we can conclude
that, in generic, the relative distance between the DRL vehicle
and the destination by crossing a certain road has relatively
minor impact on next road decision making process. While
choose the next road that has the least vehicle occupancy often
works better as shown in Fig. 7.

R EFERENCES
[1] S. Wang, S. Djahel, Z. Zhang, and J. McManis, “Next road rerouting: A
multiagent system for mitigating unexpected urban traffic congestion,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 10,
pp. 2888–2899, 2016.
[2] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van
Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam,
M. Lanctot, et al., “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks
and tree search,” nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.
[3] S. Koh, B. Zhou, H. Fang, P. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Yang, L. Guan, and
Z. Ji, “Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle navigation,”
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 96, p. 106694, 2020.
[4] Y. Geng, E. Liu, R. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Rao, S. Feng, Z. Dong, Z. Fu, and
Y. Chen, “Deep reinforcement learning based dynamic route planning
for minimizing travel time,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[5] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[6] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[7] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al.,
“An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[8] W. Kool, H. Van Hoof, and M. Welling, “Attention, learn to solve routing
problems!” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08475, 2018.
[9] M. Nazari, A. Oroojlooy, L. Snyder, and M. Takác, “Reinforcement
learning for solving the vehicle routing problem,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[10] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[11] E. Parisotto, F. Song, J. Rae, R. Pascanu, C. Gulcehre, S. Jayakumar,
M. Jaderberg, R. L. Kaufman, A. Clark, S. Noury, et al., “Stabilizing
transformers for reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 7487–7498.
[12] J. Zhao, M. Mao, X. Zhao, and J. Zou, “A hybrid of deep reinforcement
learning and local search for the vehicle routing problems,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 11, pp.
7208–7218, 2020.
[13] J. Pan, I. S. Popa, K. Zeitouni, and C. Borcea, “Proactive vehicular
traffic rerouting for lower travel time,” IEEE Transactions on vehicular
technology, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 3551–3568, 2013.
[14] S. Almagor and M. Lahijanian, “Explainable multi agent path finding,”
in AAMAS, 2020.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper proposes an explainable vehicle re-routing
scheme for congestion avoidance called XRouting using deep
reinforcement learning. The effectiveness of our approach
has been demonstrated in a simulated urban scenario with
quicker and more stable convergence when compared with
the state-of-the-art DRL solution. We have also attempted to
use explainable AI (XAI) to unbox the automated decisionmaking process of XRouting. Therefore, XRouting can guide
human drivers to effectively reuse the re-routing knowledge
learned from simulations to the realistic driving. Future work
includes more extensive testing under various road conditions
to improve the explainability to human drivers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:11:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

