39626

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

Congestion-Aware Path Planning With
Vehicle–Road Cooperation in AIoV
Guoqiang Liu , Muhammad Bilal , Senior Member, IEEE, Qingyang Wang,
and Xiaolong Xu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the gradually integration of Internet of
Vehicles (IoV) and artificial intelligence (AI), artificial intelligence
of vehicles (AIoV) is emerging as a novel paradigm with
advanced capability for information gathering and decisionmaking. Leveraging massive traffic information facilitated by
vehicle–road coordination in AIoV, path planning has the potential to effectively mitigate existing traffic problems, such as
road congestion, improving traffic performance. However, the
dynamic nature of traffic flow and the complexity of road
networks increase the difficulty of path planning, posing a
serious threat to road safety. In response to this challenge, a
reinforcement learning based path planning scheme with traffic
flow prediction, named RPFP, is proposed. RPFP consists of
two fundamental components: 1) precise traffic flow prediction
and 2) intelligent path planning. Specifically, the temporal
convolutional network (TCN) is innovatively integrated into
the spatiotemporal graph neural network (STGNN), providing
accurate traffic flow prediction by comprehensively capturing
spatial and temporal patterns. Informed by predicted traffic
congestion, a path planning method utilizing dueling double deep
q-network (D3QN) algorithm is employed to navigate within
complex road networks. Eventually, RPFP was evaluated for
its effectiveness through comprehensive experiments conducted
on real traffic data sets. The superiority of RPFP was further
substantiated via comparisons with multiple baseline schemes.
Index Terms—Artificial intelligence of vehicles (AIoV), path
planning, reinforcement learning (RL), traffic flow prediction,
vehicle–road cooperation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE LEARNING, perception, and decision-making capabilities in artificial intelligence (AI) systems and

Manuscript received 19 May 2024; revised 28 July 2024; accepted 13
August 2024. Date of publication 28 August 2024; date of current version
6 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372242 and Grant 92267104;
in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China
under Grant BK20211284; and in part by the Postgraduate Research and
Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province under Grant KYCX24_1532.
(Corresponding author: Muhammad Bilal.)
Guoqiang Liu is with the School of Software, Nanjing University
of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing 210044, China (e-mail:
bwq0709@gmail.com).
Muhammad Bilal is with the School of Computing and Communications,
Lancaster University, LA1 4WA Lancaster, U.K. (e-mail: m.bilal@ieee.org).
Qingyang Wang is with the School of Reading, Nanjing University
of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing 210044, China (e-mail:
wqy3098684229@gmail.com).
Xiaolong Xu is with the School of Software, Jiangsu Province Engineering
Research Center of Advanced Computing and Intelligent Services and Jiangsu
Collaborative Innovation Center of Atmospheric Environment and Equipment
Technology, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210044, China (e-mail: xlxu@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3446699

involvement of human cognitive abilities, endowing AI with
the ability to execute complex thought processes with high
accuracy [1], [2]. As an AI-integrated system designed to
provide intelligent traffic management, intelligent transportation systems (ITSs) benefit from AI in information gathering
and smart traffic decision-making. The Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), as a significant component of ITS, undergoes further
development propelled by advanced technologies, such as
edge computing, wireless communication, and sensor technologies [3], [4], [5]. Due to AI’s capability to significantly
enhance the efficiency of massive data collection and decisionmaking intelligence, it is gradually converging with IoV to
create a new paradigm known as artificial intelligence of
vehicles (AIoV) [6]. In AIoV, data originating from diverse
sensors with varying sources and types can undergo efficient
and unified processing, thereby fostering enhanced collaboration between vehicles and the road infrastructure. Relying on
broader vehicular-road coordination, AIoV plays an increasingly significant role in ITS, providing intelligent services for
vehicles, such as advanced detection of road congestion and
intelligent path planning [7].
Traffic congestion is becoming an increasingly severe global
issue, primarily due to the continuous growth of vehicles
worldwide and significant increase in travel frequency [8].
Mega-cities like Beijing, New York, Tokyo, London, and
others experience particularly severe congestion, significantly
impacting residents’ satisfaction. Statistical data indicates that
the annual global economic losses attributable to traffic congestion amount to several hundred billion dollars. In pursuit
of congestion alleviation, improved traffic performance, and
enhanced traffic safety, various smart traffic control methods undergo extensive research. These encompass intelligent
traffic signal optimization (ITSO), intelligent parking systems
(IPSs), and intelligent lane management (ILM) [9], [10]. Path
planning, incorporating real-time traffic conditions, empowers
vehicles to proactively evade congested segments, thereby
averting congestion escalation. This approach is recognized as
a viable solution to effectively address traffic congestion issues
and enhance driving efficiency [11].
Relying on vehicle–road cooperation, vehicles can obtain
road conditions, such as traffic flow, from roadside units
(RSUs) during path planning, employing this information as
the theoretical foundation for planning decision. However,
only depending exclusively on real-time traffic flow for
planned paths, to be traversed in the future, may pose challenges in achieving comprehensive and efficacious avoidance

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2327-4662 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONGESTION-AWARE PATH PLANNING WITH VEHICLE–ROAD COOPERATION

of traffic congestion. Therefore, accurate prediction of future
traffic flow becomes imperative [12]. n consideration of the
attributes of road networks, the prediction of traffic flow can be
conducted along two dimensions: 1) temporal and 2) spatial.
Deep learning (DL) prediction models, such as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), long short-term memory (LSTM), and gated
recurrent unit (GRU), demonstrate proficiency in time-series
modeling of traffic flow [13]. Leveraging historical traffic flow
data as training data, these models effectively capture timeseries features inherent in traffic flow. Concurrently, graph
neural networks (GNNs) model the topological structure of
intricate road networks, accounting for the mutual influence
between roads. Through iterative information aggregation
between adjacent nodes, GNNs can adeptly capture spatial
features integral to understanding traffic flow [14].
Following the prediction of future traffic flow, congestionaware path planning within complex road networks can be
executed based on the prediction results [11]. Dependent
solely on manual path planning by drivers for departure and
destination points or centralized path planning by dispatchers, however, entails substantial resource consumption and
encounters challenges in efficiently avoiding congested segments. Intelligent path planning methods grounded in machine
learning (ML) and DL find extensive application in addressing
this issue. Algorithms, including A-star search algorithm (A*),
ant colony optimization (ACO), simulated annealing, genetic
algorithms, and particle swarm optimization, among others,
have been employed in intelligent path planning endeavors and
have demonstrated effectiveness [15], [16], [17].
While numerous traffic flow prediction schemes exist, it
remains crucial to account for both spatial and temporal
features to ensure accurate predictions in complex road
networks. Furthermore, the dynamic and intricate nature
of traffic conditions presents challenges for conventional
path planning algorithms, including the imperative need for
real-time responsiveness and environmental adaptability. So,
a congestion-aware intelligent path planning scheme with
vehicle–road Cooperation in AIoV is proposed in this article.
The main contributions of our work are as follows: 1) the
path planning model, facilitated by vehicle–road cooperation,
is constructed under AIoV environment; 2) by innovatively
incorporating temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) into
spatiotemporal graph neural networks (STGNNs), accurate
prediction of complex traffic flow in road networks is
achieved; 3) by employing dueling double deep q-network
(D3QN) algorithm, congestion-aware intelligent path planning which superiors in adapting to dynamic environments
is accomplished; and 4) Conducting comprehensive experiments on real traffic data sets and comparative analysis
to prove the efficiency and superiority of the proposed
scheme.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In
Section II, the related researches is elaborated and summarized. Then, system framework and travel consumption model
are formulated, followed by the definition of the problem
to be addressed. The path planning scheme in AIoV is
elaborated, including traffic flow prediction and D3QN based
path planning, in Section IV. In Section V, experimental

39627

results are presented and analyzed. Finally, the conclusions are
presented in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, the existing researches related to our work
are reviewed from the aspect of artificial intelligence for
vehicle–road collaboration, traffic flow prediction, and route
planning.
Development of artificial intelligence technologies,
including DL and reinforcement learning (RL), promotes
popularization of intelligent services. Also, vehicle–road
collaboration connects vehicles with intelligent RSUs,
improving insufficiency of on-board computing power and
providing extra environmental information for vehicles. To this
end, combination of artificial intelligence and vehicle–road
collaboration has attracted great attention to provide delaysensitive IoV services. To help emergency vehicles arrive
faster, Ding et al. [18] proposed a learning-based cooperative
vehicle–road scheduling framework named LEVID. In
LEVID, a real-time route planning module was designed based
on the artificial potential field method and a traffic signal
control module was designed using graph attention RL. The
two modules interacted with each other and made decisions
iteratively. Chen et al. [19] proposed vehicle-infrastructure
cooperation based approach to detect road hazards. They
generalized vital features from few road hazard data through
a meta-learning paradigm, designed a lightweight detection
model to adapt to vehicles’ low-computing power, and
used knowledge distillation to reduce complexity of model
and data. The proposed approach remarkably improves the
accuracy and traffic flow prediction. Cui et al. [20] presented
a data-driven Cloud-Fog-Edge Collaborative Driver–Vehicle–
Road framework to provide high-quality ITS services while
protecting customers’ privacy. Cao et al. [21] reduced delay
of IoV services by accurately determining vehicle network
conditions based on the fuzzy theory and effectively offloading
service requests based on RL.
As a key part of intelligent transport system, accurate
traffic flow prediction makes great contributions on mitigating congestion and making safer and cost-efficient travel.
Ma et al. [22] developed a novel traffic flow prediction model
to further improve the accuracy of short-term traffic flow
prediction. They obtained a stable time series as input of
model by conducting time series analysis as well as smoothing
and standardization processing on traffic flow data, and established an improved LSTM network model based on LSTM
and bidirectional LSTM. Li et al. [23] developed a novel
multisensor data correlation graph convolution network model,
called MDCGCN, to improve traffic flow prediction accuracy.
Compared with existing work, MDCGCN enables to conduct
medium and long-term traffic prediction through analyzing the
complex and changeable spatial–temporal correlation among
roads. Different from former studies mainly focused on
flow forecasting in a regular grid region, Ali et al. [24]
designed a deep hybrid spatio-temporal dynamic networks,
called DHSTNet, to forecast both the inflow and outflow of
irregular grid regions at the same time. They also developed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

39628

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

and integrated graph convolutional network with DHSTNet
model to concurrently capture all dependencies in the irregular
grid regions. Wang et al. [25] proposed an accurate localitysensitive hashing-based traffic flow prediction approach to
ensure high-accuracy and time-efficient traffic flow prediction
while protecting customers’ privacy.
As another significant part of intelligent transport system,
reasonable route planning can help minimize logistics and
tour costs. Teng et al. [26] provided a detailed overview
and discussion of the latest motion planning methods for
autonomous vehicles. These methods contribute to enhancing
the convenience of autonomous vehicles and further promoting
their global proliferation. In [27], the problems caused by
traffic congestion are thoroughly analyzed, highlighting the
effectiveness of traffic control, including path planning, in
addressing these issues. Additionally, Li et al. [27] introduced
path planning in mixed traffic environments. Lin et al. [28]
proposed a distributed-learning-based vehicle routing decision algorithm using multiagent RL to alleviate the traffic
congestion. The proposed algorithm not only greatly shorten
decision delay but also effectively reduces waiting time of
vehicles on the road. Liang et al. [29] designed a preservingprivacy route planning scheme in vehicular ad-hoc network
based on oblivious transfer. In the scheme, vehicles deduce
information of RSUs with the help of the certification authority
who does not know the source of deduced information. After
fast authentication is achieved between vehicles and RSUs,
communication between adjacent vehicles is established. The
scheme provides fast route planning for vehicles while well
preserving customers’ privacy. In order to optimize route
planning in the air-ground integrated network, Cai et al. [30]
proposed an optimization strategy of accompanying graph
navigation for unmanned devices. The proposed strategy helps
reduce the power consumption and CO2 gas emissions of
unmanned devices. Aiming at minimizing the earliness and
tardiness of a specified delivery time while minimizing the
total completion time, Nishida and Nishi [31] developed a
heuristic solution procedure to derive a conflict-free routing
problem through which earliness and tardiness penalties are
minimized while the total completion time of each task is also
minimized under dynamic task arrivals.
Although extensive research has been conducted on path
planning within IoV, only a limited number of studies have
considered harnessing the powerful vehicle–road collaboration. Furthermore, most path planning schemes rely solely on
real-time road conditions, making it challenging to adapt to
future traffic congestion. Therefore, to further enhance path
planning effectiveness and improve driver satisfaction, it is
necessary to conduct future traffic flow predictions based path
planning with vehicle–road collaboration.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM D EFINITION
A. System Framework
The vehicle–road cooperative system (VRCS) utilizes
advanced wireless communication and IoV technologies to
achieve dynamic real-time bidirectional interaction between
vehicles and roads. Base stations (BSs) and RSUs utilize

Fig. 1.

Framework of vehicle road cooperation system in AIoV.
TABLE I
S UMMARY OF N OTATIONS

collected road information and employ artificial intelligence to
provide intelligent services, such as route planning to vehicles.
Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of VRCS. Table I enumerates
the primary notations utilized in this article.
In VRCS, intelligent vehicles equipped with wireless communication capabilities to communicate with infrastructure at
the roadside. The RSUs are distributed along the sides of the
road and communicate with vehicles within their coverage
area through wireless links. BS is situated in an open area
and is connected to multiple RSUs through wired links,
facilitating real-time data exchange between them. Due to the
specific geographical characteristics, the road network can be
modeled as G = {V, E}. V is the set of road nodes, V =
{v1 , . . . , vi , . . . , vN }, vi represents the ith node in G and N is
the number of nodes. E = {e1 , . . . , ej , . . . , eM } is the set of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONGESTION-AWARE PATH PLANNING WITH VEHICLE–ROAD COOPERATION

edges between nodes in G and M is the number of edges.
Taking into account practical factors, i.e., the nodes within
G are not necessarily interconnected, the introduction of the
adjacency matrix A is necessary. A ∈ RN×N and the value of
Ai,j is based on the following equation that:

1, vi connects to vj
Ai,j =
(1)
0,
otherwise.
The matrix A contains only 0s and 1s, making A an
N-dimensional Boolean matrix. Due to the noncomplete connectivity of nodes in G, it is evident that M ≤ N 2 .
B. Travel Consumption Model
Vehicles traveling on the road have information, such as the
origin, destination, and current location. Therefore, the travel
information of a vehicle can be represented using a triplet
<o, p, d>, where o is the origin point, p and d are the current
location and destination, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, during the process of traveling from the origin to the destination,
there may be multiple routes. W = {w1 , . . . , wk , . . . , wK } is
adopted to represent the set of all possible routes, where wk is
a list containing the roads traversed on the kth possible route.
The objective of this scheme is to identify the most suitable
route from numerous possibilities, taking into account factors,
such as total travel time and total travel distance.
Traffic speed is chosen as the traffic information for roads,
as traffic congestion levels and other information related to
traffic flow can be inferred from traffic speed. The speed
information of roads is recorded using the matrix S ∈ RN×T ,
where N is the number of nodes and T is the time span of
the recorded data. So, si is the speed of vi during the current
time period. 1 Since the planned routes will be executed
in future time intervals, accurate prediction of future traffic
speeds can be achieved by utilizing historical traffic speed data.
This approach aims to enhance road planning effectiveness by
relying on future traffic speed. The prediction process can be
represented by the following equation that:


(2)
si = f siT−t , . . . , sTi
where f is the prediction function and will be detailed in
Section IV. The length of the roads is recorded in the set
L = {l1 , . . . , li , . . . , lN }, where li is the length of vi . Therefore,
the time consumption for traveling through vi on route wk can
be calculated using (3) that
ci =

li
.
si

(3)

Therefore, the total travel time for wk can be calculated using
the following equation that:
ρk =

N


ci × αik

(4)

i=1
1 In this manuscript, according to the definition of the road network G,

during time period t, “node speed” is equivalent to the traffic speed of the
corresponding road segment, as well as “node length.”

39629

where
αik


1, vi ∈ wk
=
0, otherwise.

(5)

It is worth noting that unexpected events, such as traffic
accidents, are not accounted for as additional waiting time for
vehicles. Total distance of the route can be calculated using
the following equation that:
σk =

N


li × αik .

(6)

i=1

Another equally important factor is the congestion level of
the road, which often significantly influences the driving
experience of the driver. The congestion level of the vi can be
calculated based on the following equation that:
ηi = 1 −

si
si

(7)

where si is the theoretical speed of vi . When there are no
vehicles on the road, vi is the maximum speed at which a
vehicle can travel on that road. This equation signifies that as
the actual speed si of vi becomes smaller than the theoretical
speed si , the congestion level ηi of vi increases. The overall
congestion level of wk is determined by the following equation
that:
N
k
i=1 li × ηi × αi
.
(8)
γk = 
N
k
i=1 li × αi
This not only takes into consideration the congestion level of
the road but also includes the length of the road as a weight
in the calculation. This aligns more with reality, as roads with
higher congestion levels and greater lengths tend to have a
more significant impact on reducing the driving experience for
the driver.
C. Problem Definition
After accurately modeling the three most critical factors
in the path planning process, namely, driving time, driving
distance, and road congestion level, the objective of optimal
path planning becomes evident. It is to select the path that
minimizes the overall combination of these three factors from
numerous possible routes. The comprehensive value of the
three factors for route wk can be calculated through a weighted
sum, as outlined in the following equation that:
k = w1 ρk + w2 σk + w3 γk

(9)

where w1 , w2 , and w3 are adjustable parameters used to
control the importance of different factors.
Hence, the formalized problem is given as
min k , k ∈ [1, K],
s.t. |wk | ≤ N

(10)
(11)

where |wk | represents the number of roads included in route
wk and |wk | ≤ N restricts that the number of roads in route
wk must be less than the total number of roads in G.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

39630

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

Algorithm 1: Traffic Flow Prediction Using STGNN
Input: Historical traffic flow data S, road adjacency
matrix A and the length of roads L.
Output: Traffic flow prediction result
ST = [s1 , . . . , st , . . . , sT ]
1 Construct an undirected graph G = (V, E) based on A;
for each episode do
2
for (i = 1; i< = N; i + +) do
3
for ej ∈ (i) do
4
Computing the influence of node ej on ei
with respect to lj and li ;
5
end
6
Aggregating spatial information from neighboring
nodes
by equation (13) that
Fig. 2. Traffic flow prediction using STGNN integrated with TCN.
sti  = j∈(i) G(sti , e(i,j) , stj );
7
Leveraging the temporal dimension’s information
aggregation,
by equation (15) that
IV. O PTIMAL PATH P LANNING S CHEME IN AI OV
k−1 as delineated
 =

w
∗
S
.
S
t
i=0 i
t−di
This section provides a detailed presentation of the proposed
end
scheme RPFP to address the optimization problem modeled 8
Obtain the prediction result St .
in Section III. The section is divided into two parts. The first 9
part focuses on precise prediction of traffic flow using spatio- 10 end
temporal GNNs. And the second part involves optimal path 11 Return the traffic flow prediction results;
planning with RL.
A. Traffic Flow Prediction Using STGNN
The efficacy of STGNN lies in its capacity to concurrently
address interdependencies within spatial and temporal dimensions, rendering it well-suited for intricate traffic network
configurations, thereby garnering considerable attention in
the field of traffic flow prediction. The GNN integrated
into STGNN adeptly captures the spatial intricacies of road
networks by assimilating information from proximate nodes.
Concurrently, the time series prediction module meticulously
explores the temporal dynamics intrinsic to the model.
It can be inferred from Section III that the traffic flow record
embedding vectors of graph G is S ∈ RN×T , so the embedding
vectors of graph G at time t is St = [st1 , . . . , sti , . . . , stN ], as
illustrated on the left side of Fig. 2. Utilizing GNNs enables
the aggregation of flow information between different nodes
through the spatial connectivity of the graph G. The specific
process is illustrated as follows:
St = G(St )
= G st1 , . . . , sti , . . . , stN

(12)

where G is the objective function and is depicted as the
spatial prediction module in Fig. 2. The more detailed process
of information updating between nodes is defined by the
following equations:

 

(13)
sti =
G sti , e(i,j) , stj
j∈(i)

where (i) is the set of all neighbor nodes of ei and e(i,j)
is the importance of the features of node ej to ei , indicating
the connectivity between roads in the proposed traffic flow
prediction scenario. It is noteworthy that e(i,j) is usually =
e(j,i) , which implies that the influence between node ej and

node ei is asymmetrical, signifying a difference in their mutual
impact on each other. This is due to certain roads being
one-way streets, a real-world constraint that determines this
characteristic.
To mitigate challenges, such as gradient explosion or vanishing gradients, frequently encountered in the training process
of traditional sequential prediction networks like RNNs and
LSTMs, this scheme creatively employs TCN as the means
for temporal prediction. TCN utilizes convolutional operations instead of recursive operations to process input data
and employs dilated causal convolutional layers to expand
the receptive field. The specific prediction function can be
referenced from the temporal prediction module in Fig. 2. Its
mathematical form is as follows:

+b
St = F w ∗ St−d

(14)

where F is the activation function, w is the convolutional
kernel, and b represents the bias term. To attain a comprehensive insight into the Dilated Causal Convolution operation,
one is encouraged to consult the ensuing equation that
St

=

k−1



wi ∗ St−di
.

(15)

i=0

Here, k denotes the dimension of the convolutional kernel,
while d signifies the dilation factor.
Utilizing the STGNN, a method for predicting traffic flow
that concurrently addresses both spatial and temporal dimensions has been developed. The integration of TCN as the
temporal prediction model effectively mitigates the challenge
of vanishing gradients. For comprehensive details regarding
the proposed scheme, kindly refer to Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONGESTION-AWARE PATH PLANNING WITH VEHICLE–ROAD COOPERATION

B. Congestion-Aware Path Planning in AIoV
This section furnishes an elaborate introduction to the
path planning scheme, segmented into distinct sections: the
definition of Markov decision process (MDP) and the path
planning scheme based on D3QN.
1) Definition of MDP: The primary aim of RL algorithms
is to iteratively train the agent through interactions with the
environment, empowering it to autonomously make decisions
that lead to the maximization of cumulative rewards. In the
context of path planning, these algorithms engage in experiential learning by interacting with the environment, considering
factors, such as the current road distance to the destination
and the fundamental conditions of roads connected to the
current road. The ultimate objective is to cultivate the agent’s
capability to select paths characterized by shorter distances,
reduced time requirements, and lower congestion levels as the
planned route.
The MDP serves as a fundamental model widely utilized in
RL, with prevalent applications in disciplines like economics
and operations research. Key components of an MDP consist
of four essential elements: 1) state space (St); 2) action space
(Ac); 3) state transition probabilities (Po); and 4) reward
function (Re), succinctly represented as M = (St, Ac, Po, Re).
Subsequently, detailed explanations for the aforementioned
four elements in the context of path planning will be presented.
1) State Space: Throughout the vehicle’s trajectory, the
evolution of the state space is contingent upon alterations
in the occupied road segment. Consequently, the definition of the state space is intricately linked to the current
road segment. The precise delineation is articulated as
follows:
St(i) = {[ei ], [Cg(i)], [Ds(i)], [d]}

(16)

where ei signifies the present road. Cg(i) denotes the
congestion level of the road linked to ei , while roads
not connected to ei are regarded as having an infinite
congestion level. Ds(i) represents the length of the
road associated with ei , with roads not connected to ei
considered to have an infinite length. The variable d
signifies the destination of the ongoing journey.
2) Action Space: In the domain of path planning, the
agent’s actions align with the count of roads linked to
the current road segment. Generating distinct numerical
outputs signifies the road that the agent intends to
navigate to in the subsequent step. Ac is used to represent
the action space.
3) State Transition Probabilities: The state transition probabilities pertains to the probability of transitioning from
the current state St(i) to the next state St(i + 1), contingent on the actions output by the agent. The intricate
computational process will be elucidated through the
following equations:
Pb = (St(i + 1)|St(i), ac(i))

(17)

where ac(i) is the action.
4) Rewards Mechanism: As the agent iteratively refines its
path planning strategy, the output action at each step

39631

plays a pivotal role in reward calculation. Opting for a
road segment that is shorter in distance, exhibits lower
congestion, and brings the agent closer to the destination
results in a positive increase in the reward. The specific
calculation process is outlined as follows:
Re = ζ ∗ Ds(i) + τ ∗ Cg(i) + χ .

(18)

In the above equation, parameters ζ and τ are employed
to modulate the reward and can be adjusted according to
distinct scenarios. Additionally, χ symbolizes the reward
penalty, exhibiting a positive value when the subsequent
road is closer to the destination and a negative value
when it is farther away from the destination.
2) Path Planning Scheme Based on D3QN: DQN is a RL
algorithm adept at effectively tackling problems characterized
by discrete action spaces, utilizing deep neural networks to
navigate high-dimensional spaces. Nevertheless, the application of DQN often encounters the challenge of “maximization
bias.” In response to this, Double DQN was introduced,
successfully alleviating the issue by modifying the calculation
method for target values. Analogous to Double DQN, Dueling
DQN represents an enhanced iteration of DQN. Through
the introduction of the “dueling” architecture, Dueling DQN
decomposes the Q-value function into two functions: 1) the
state value of the given state and 2) the advantage values
for each action. By enhancing the modeling of state values
and action advantages, Dueling DQN notably enhances the
performance and learning efficiency of DQN.
The scheme implemented herein leverages the dueling
double deep Q network (D3QN), amalgamating key principles
from both the Double DQN and Dueling DQN algorithms.
This amalgamation is designed to augment learning stability
and mitigate the challenge of overestimation, rendering it
particularly efficacious in RL tasks marked by heightened
uncertainty and complexity. This rationale underscores the
selection of D3QN for path planning in this scheme.
1) Environment of Path Planning: As illustrated in Fig. 3,
RSUs collect the environment data essential for RL
from the trajectories of vehicles within their designated
coverage areas. These RSUs furnish the requisite tuples
to the agent during the training phase. Initially, the
agent initializes network parameters and an experience
replay memory. Subsequently, guided by the environment, the agent performs actions, calculates rewards,
and observes state transitions. The acquired training
experiences are stored in the memory. Upon reaching its
capacity limit, training samples are randomly extracted
from the memory to train the two networks.
2) Training of Networks in D3QN: Within the framework of
D3QN, the training objective for the Critic network is to
acquire an approximation of the state-action value function, endeavoring to align its output Q-values closely
with the actual optimal Q-values. The loss function of
the primary critic network is calculated by
N
 
1
Q Stk (i), Ack (i); θ c − yk
L θC =
N
k=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

39632

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

Algorithm 2: Path Planning Based on D3QN
Input: Space of state St, Space of action Ac and the
network of D3QN.
Output: Strategies for path planning
1 Initialize network parameters and the buffer memory;
2 Size of buffer memory π = 0;
3 for each episode do
4
Reset the reinforcement learning environment;
5
for t in episode do
6
The critic network outputs the action;
7
Compute the reward using equation (18);
8
if π reaches the preset value then
9
Sample from buffer memory for training;
10
Compute yk using
yk = rk (i) + γ maxa Q(Stk+1 (i), a ; θ T );
11
Getting the loss as L(θ C ) =
1 N
2
Q(Stk (i), Ack (i); θ c ) − yk ;
N k=1
Fig. 3. Path planning scheme based on D3QN.
12
Updating the network parameters with
∗
θ C ← θ C − α∇θ C L(θ C );
13
Updating θ T after several steps with
1 
Q(s, a; θ ) = V(s; θ ) + A(s, a; θ ) −
A s, a ; θ
θ T ← θ C.
|A| 
a
14
end
(19) 15
end
16 end
c
where θ is the parameters of critic network and N is the
T
C
size of the sample batch. Q(Stk (i), Ack (i); θ c ) denotes 17 Return θ , θ and the network of D3QN;
the output of the Critic network, signifying the Q-value 18 Output the strategies for path planning.
obtained by selecting action Ack (i) in state Stk (i). The
target value is calculated by
(20) approach are inferred through the analysis of experimental
yk = rk (i) + γ max Q Stk+1 (i), a ; θ T
a
results.

where a represents any action that can be taken in the
next state Stk+1 (i). And rk (i) is the reward in the current A. Experimental Setup
state, γ represents the discount factor.
Two data sets are employed for the evaluation of traffic flow
3) Network Parameters Updating: In D3QN, the Critic prediction. Without loss of generality, the data set utilized is
network is updated using the gradient descent method. the traffic flow data set.
Iteratively, the network parameters are adjusted based
1) SZ-Taxi: This data set was collected from taxi trajecon the computed loss value, employing a predetermined
tories in Shenzhen over a period of 31 days, from
learning rate until the model converges.
Jan.1 to Jan.31, 2015. The data comprises traffic flow
 
∗
information collected at fixed time intervals for roads
(21)
θ C ← θ C − α∇θ C L θ C .
within the region. The included adjacency matrix delineates the connectivity between roads.
Equation (21) elucidates the process of updating the
2) Los-Loop: This data set is obtained from detection
parameters of the critic network, with the parameters of
sensors on Los Angeles highways, covering the period
the target network being copied from the critic network
from Mar.1 to Mar.7, 2012. Similar to the SZ-taxi data
after several training steps.
set, it also incorporates an adjacency matrix illustrating
Algorithm 2 shows the details of the path planning scheme in
the connectivity between roads.
IoV.
The complexity of Algorithm 2 is O(E × T × f (N)), where In the experiments, 70% of each data set is utilized as the
E represents the number of episodes, T represents the number training data set, with the remaining 30% serving as the
of time steps, and f (N) denotes the forward propagation validation data set. Experiments are implemented in python
complexity of the neural network with N being the number 3.10, Pytorch 2.0 and conducted on the server with Intel i7of parameters. The above offers an intricate elucidation of the 8700 CPU (3.2 GHz, 6 cores), 32-GB DRAM, and NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPU.
path planning scheme.
V. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
Experimental setup and comparative experiments are
presented. The efficacy and superiority of the proposed

B. Analysis of the Prediction Performance
To precisely capture the spatial and temporal characteristics
of road traffic flow, this approach employs STGNN-TCN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONGESTION-AWARE PATH PLANNING WITH VEHICLE–ROAD COOPERATION

39633

trends, but it deviates notably from the actual data, with only a
few data points matching. Conversely, methods focusing solely
on a single dimension face challenges in accurately capturing
the evolving patterns in traffic flow.
To further illustrate the performance of different schemes in
traffic flow prediction tasks, we leverage more intuitive data
and employ various evaluation metrics. The specific details are
outlined below.
1) Mean Absolute Error (MAE): MAE is the average of
the absolute errors, providing a better reflection of the
actual prediction value errors. MAE is calculated as
1
|ŷi − yi |.
n
n

MAE =
Fig. 4.

Traffic flow prediction with different schemes.

Furthermore, to assess the effectiveness and superiority of
the proposed method in traffic flow prediction, four distinct
schemes have been implemented. The particulars of each
comparative approach are outlined as follows.
1) Traffic Flow Prediction With TCN (TCN): The scheme
utilizes TCN as the traffic flow prediction model,
employing 1-D convolutional layers with dilated kernels
to extract temporal features from time-series data [32].
This configuration enables accurate prediction of traffic
flow.
2) Traffic Flow Prediction With GRU (GRU): GRU, as an
enhanced iteration of RNN, adeptly tackles challenges,
such as gradient explosion or vanishing gradients [33].
Its proficiency in long-term time series prediction
renders it suitable for applications like traffic flow
prediction.
3) Traffic Flow Prediction With GNN (GNN): GNN exhibits
proficiency in handling data with a graph structure,
enabling exploration of mutual influences between roads
within complex road networks. This capability is particularly well-suited for scenarios involving traffic flow
prediction.
4) Traffic Flow Prediction With RNN Integrating TCN
(RNN-TCN): RNN, a fundamental neural network
architecture, is commonly employed for inferring and
predicting time series data. Through integration with
TCN, RNN can achieve enhanced training efficiency and
improved performance in traffic flow prediction.
5) Traffic Flow Prediction With STGNN Incorporating GRU
(STGNN-GRU): STGNN excels at concurrently capturing features from both spatial and temporal dimensions,
rendering it particularly suitable for intricate road scenarios with spatial distribution characteristics. In the
STGNN employed in this scheme, GRU serves as the
temporal prediction model.
Fig. 4 portrays the predictive performance of various
schemes over ten time intervals, with the red solid line
denoting the original traffic flow data. The graph clearly
indicates that STGNN-TCN demonstrates superior predictive
performance, closely aligning with the trends and values of the
original data. STGNN-GRU exhibits some adherence to the

(22)

i=1

2) Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE): MAPE represents an enhancement over MAE, as it computes the
percentage error between actual and predicted values.
This mitigates the influence of data range, providing a
more robust evaluation metric. The calculation equation
is shown as

n 
100%  ŷi − yi 
(23)
MAPE =
 y .
n
i=1

i

3) Root Mean Square Error (RMSE): RMSE quantifies
the average deviation between predicted and actual
values, sharing the same unit as the target values. The
calculation equation of RMSE is that

 n
1 
2
RMSE = 
(24)
ŷi − yi .
n
i=1

The performance of the mentioned schemes under various
evaluation metrics is presented in Table II. Observing Table II,
it is evident that across various metrics, STGNN-TCN demonstrates the best performance, followed by STGNN-GRU. A
preliminary analysis attributes this trend to the consideration
of features in both temporal and spatial dimensions exclusively
in these two schemes among the five experimental setups. The
other three schemes, focusing solely on features in a single
dimension, exhibit comparatively poorer performance, ranked
from best to worst as TCN, RNN-TCN, GCN, and GRU.
Furthermore, through joint validation on two data sets, the
proposed traffic flow prediction scheme consistently attains
optimal results.
C. Analysis of the Path Planning Performance
To attain superior path planning results, we propose a path
planning strategy grounded in the RL algorithm D3QN. In
an effort to identify the optimal RL algorithm for discrete
action problems and to compare the effectiveness of the RLbased path planning strategy with other approaches, we further
implement the following strategies.
1) Path Planning Scheme Based on DQN (DQN): This
scheme is rooted in the classical RL algorithm
DQN, which amalgamates Q-learning with deep neural
networks, rendering it effective for addressing discrete
action problems in deep RL.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

39634

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

TABLE II
D IFFERENT M ETRIC VALUES OF D IFFERENT S CHEMES

Fig. 6.

Fig. 5.

Rewards and variances of D3QN with different network layers.

2) Path Planning Scheme Based on DDQN (DDQN):
Double DQN (DDQN) represents an improvement over
DQN, employing two Q networks: one for action selection and the other for estimating the value of that
action [34]. This architecture is designed to address the
overestimation problem.
3) Path Planning Scheme Based on Dijkstra (Dijkstra):
Dijkstra is a greedy search algorithm that iteratively
expands the most promising path at each step, ensuring
optimality in finding the shortest path within a weighted
graph.
4) Path Planning Scheme Based on ACO (ACO): Swarm
intelligence, inspired by the foraging behavior of
ants, utilizes a probabilistic approach to simultaneously
explore multiple paths. However, it does not guarantee
the discovery of the absolute optimal path; instead, it
can only find statistically good solutions.
In RL, the intricacies of the environment present challenges
for a single-layer network in the path planning scheme.
Therefore, a critical initial step involves determining the
appropriate number of network layers. Fig. 5 below illustrates
the variations in rewards and variance for D3QN with different
network layer configurations in a complex environment.
From Fig. 5, it is evident that when the network has only
two layers, D3QN obtains rewards with significant oscillations
and high variance. As the number of layers increases to three,
the oscillation amplitude of the rewards decreases, and the

Reward of DQN, DDQN, D3QN under different routes.

variance reduces, but the ideal performance is not yet achieved.
D3QN with four and five layers shows better performance
in terms of reward trends and variance, with little difference
between them. Considering that a higher number of network
layers would incur more time and resource consumption
during training, after analysis, it is determined that D3QN
requires a four-layer network for executing the path planning
task.
After determining the appropriate number of network layers,
the subsequent step involves comparing RL algorithms. Three
distinct RL algorithms are utilized with the same number
of network layers and training rounds. From Fig. 6, it is
evident that under three different routes (30, 60, 90), the
average rewards achieved by D3QN are higher than those
of DQN and DDQN. This suggests that D3QN is the most
suitable for executing path planning tasks. As shown in Fig. 7,
with an increase in the number of routes, the variance of all
three strategies gradually decreases. Moreover, D3QN exhibits
the smallest reward variance, indicating that its performance
is more stable. D3QN demonstrates a reduction in variance
by 36% compared to DQN and 8.4% compared to DDQN.
Considering both Figs. 6 and 7, D3QN outperforms the other
two RL algorithms across the three different routes.
We conducted a comparison between Dijkstra and ACO
with the path planning scheme proposed in this article,
utilizing criteria, such as the distance of the path and the
time taken, to traverse it. Five pairs of start and destination
points were randomly selected as test paths. As depicted in
Fig. 8, D3QN outperforms in terms of planning path distance,
selecting the shortest path. ACO performs well, while Dijkstra

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONGESTION-AWARE PATH PLANNING WITH VEHICLE–ROAD COOPERATION

39635

VI. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 7.

Variance of DQN, DDQN, D3QN under different routes.

In addressing the challenges of achieving high-quality path
planning in complex road networks and enhancing the driving
experience, a vehicle–road cooperation framework is proposed
in AIoV. Additionally, a congestion-aware path planning
scheme, named RPFP, has been formulated. RPFP utilizes
STGNN-TCN for efficient and accurate traffic flow prediction,
serving as the decision foundation for path planning. The path
planning algorithm based on D3QN can achieve targeted path
planning in complex decision environments. In future work,
we will focus on the collaborative control strategy of signal
lights in traffic flow optimization in coordination with the
present study.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 8.

Distance of planned path under D3QN, Dijkstra, ACO.

Fig. 9.

Time consumption of planned path under D3QN, Dijkstra, ACO.

shows the poorest performance. Concerning distance, D3QN
demonstrates reductions of 12.6% and 4.63% in comparison
to Dijkstra and ACO, respectively. The analysis concludes that
the poor performance of Dijkstra is attributed to its tendency
to reach local optimal solutions in large-scale maps or long
path planning scenarios.
Fig. 9 illustrates the time consumption for five test paths
under three different path planning schemes. It can be observed
that in most cases, D3QN performs well, ACO occasionally
matches the time spent by D3QN, and Dijkstra remains the
least efficient. Concerning travel time, D3QN demonstrates
reductions of 16.9% and 21% in comparison to Dijkstra and
ACO, respectively.

[1] R. Mishra, H. P. Gupta, R. Kumar, and T. Dutta, “Leveraging augmented intelligence of things to enhance lifetime of UAV-enabled aerial
networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 586–593,
Jan. 2023.
[2] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. S. Saeed, and M. T. Khan, “FOG-empowered
augmented-intelligence-based proactive defensive mechanism for IoTenabled smart industries,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 21,
pp. 18599–18608, Nov. 2023.
[3] X. Zhou et al., “Edge computation offloading with content caching
in 6G-enabled IoV,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 2733–2747, Mar. 2024.
[4] P. Arthurs, L. Gillam, P. Krause, N. Wang, K. Halder, and A. Mouzakitis,
“A taxonomy and survey of edge cloud computing for intelligent
transportation systems and connected vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6206–6221, Jul. 2022.
[5] L. Xu, X. Zhou, M. A. Khan, X. Li, V. G. Menon, and X. Yu,
“Communication quality prediction for Internet of Vehicle (IoV)
networks: An Elman approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19644–19654, Oct. 2021.
[6] J. Zhang et al., “HiVeGPT: Human-machine-augmented intelligent
vehicles with generative pre-trained transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2027–2033, Mar. 2023.
[7] S. Aggarwal and N. Kumar, “Path planning techniques for unmanned
aerial vehicles: A review, solutions, and challenges,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 149, pp. 270–299, Jan. 2020.
[8] C. Lin, G. Han, J. Du, T. Xu, L. Shu, and Z. Lv, “Spatiotemporal
congestion-aware path planning toward intelligent transportation systems
in software-defined smart city IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7,
no. 9, pp. 8012–8024, Sep. 2020.
[9] P. W. Shaikh, M. El-Abd, M. Khanafer, and K. Gao, “A review on
swarm intelligence and evolutionary algorithms for solving the traffic
signal control problem,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 48–63, Jan. 2022.
[10] W. Wang, T. Qie, C. Yang, W. Liu, C. Xiang, and K. Huang, “An intelligent lane-changing behavior prediction and decision-making strategy
for an autonomous vehicle,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 3,
pp. 2927–2937, Mar. 2021.
[11] V.-L. Nguyen, R.-H. Hwang, and P.-C. Lin, “Controllable path planning
and traffic scheduling for emergency services in the Internet of Vehicles,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 12399–12413, 2021.
[12] X. Wang et al., “Traffic flow prediction via spatial temporal graph neural
network,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 1082–1092.
[13] D. A. Tedjopurnomo, Z. Bao, B. Zheng, F. M. Choudhury, and A. K. Qin,
“A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic prediction: Trends,
methods and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 1544–1561, Apr. 2022.
[14] F. Li et al., “Dynamic graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic
prediction: Benchmark and solution,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Disc. Data,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–21, 2023.
[15] C. Liu et al., “An improved heuristic mechanism ant colony optimization
algorithm for solving path planning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 271,
Jul. 2023, Art. no. 110540.
[16] Y. V. Pehlivanoglu and P. Pehlivanoglu, “An enhanced genetic algorithm
for path planning of autonomous UAV in target coverage problems,”
Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 112, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107796.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

39636

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

[17] Z. Yu, Z. Si, X. Li, D. Wang, and H. Song, “A novel hybrid particle
swarm optimization algorithm for path planning of UAVs,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 22, pp. 22547–22558, Nov. 2022.
[18] L. Ding et al., “Learning to help emergency vehicles arrive faster:
A cooperative vehicle–road scheduling approach,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 5949–5962, Oct. 2023.
[19] C. Chen, G. Yao, L. Liu, Q. Pei, H. Song, and S. Dustdar, “A
cooperative vehicle-infrastructure system for road hazards detection with
edge intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 5186–5198, May 2023.
[20] Z. Cui et al., “Privacy and accuracy for cloud-fog-edge collaborative
driver–vehicle–road relation graphs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8749–8761, Aug. 202.
[21] S. Cao et al., “Reinforcement learning based tasks offloading in vehicular edge computing networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 234, Oct. 2023,
Art. no. 109894.
[22] C. Ma, G. Dai, and J. Zhou, “Short-term traffic flow prediction for
urban road sections based on time series analysis and LSTM_BILSTM
method,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 5615–5624,
Jun. 2022.
[23] W. Li, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Q. Wu, “Traffic flow prediction
over muti-sensor data correlation with graph convolution network,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 427, pp. 50–63, Feb. 2021.
[24] A. Ali, Y. Zhu, and M. Zakarya, “Exploiting dynamic spatiotemporal graph convolutional neural networks for citywide traffic flows
prediction,” Neural Netw., vol. 145, pp. 233–247, Jan. 2022.
[25] F. Wang et al., “Privacy-aware traffic flow prediction based on multiparty sensor data with zero trust in smart city,” ACM Trans. Internet
Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1–19, Aug. 2023.
[26] S. Teng et al., “Motion planning for autonomous driving: The state of
the art and future perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 6,
pp. 3692–3711, Jun. 2023.
[27] J. Li, C. Yu, Z. Shen, Z. Su, and W. Ma, “A survey on urban traffic
control under mixed traffic environment with connected automated
vehicles,” Transp. Res. Part C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 154, Sep. 2023,
Art. no. 104258.
[28] K. Lin, C. Li, Y. Li, C. Savaglio, and G. Fortino, “Distributed learning
for vehicle routing decision in software defined Internet of Vehicles,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3730–3741,
Jun. 2020.
[29] Y. Liang, Y. Liu, and B. B. Gupta, “PPRP: Preserving-privacy route
planning scheme in VANETs,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol., vol. 22,
no. 4, pp. 1–18, 2022.
[30] K. Cai et al., “Route planning based on parallel optimization in the airground integrated network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 15762–15772, Dec. 2023.
[31] K. Nishida and T. Nishi, “Dynamic optimization of conflict-free routing
of automated guided vehicles for just-in-time delivery,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2099–2114, Jul. 2023.
[32] Y. Ren, D. Zhao, D. Luo, H. Ma, and P. Duan, “Global-local temporal
convolutional network for traffic flow prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1578–1584, Feb. 2022.
[33] W. Shu, K. Cai, and N. N. Xiong, “A short-term traffic flow prediction
model based on an improved gate recurrent unit neural network,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16654–16665, Sep. 2021.
[34] Z. Chu, F. Wang, T. Lei, and C. Luo, “Path planning based on deep
reinforcement learning for autonomous underwater vehicles under ocean
current disturbance,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 108–120,
Jan. 2023.

Guoqiang Liu received the B.S. degree in software
engineering from Nanjing University of Information
Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2022,
where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree
in software engineering.
His research interests include mobile edge computing, Internet of Things, and deep learning.

Muhammad Bilal (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in information and communication
network engineering from the School of Electronics
and Telecommunications Research Institute, Korea
University of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
South Korea, in 2017.
From 2018 to 2023, he was an Associate Professor
with the Division of Computer and Electronic
Systems Engineering, Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies, Yongin, South Korea. In 2023, he joined
Lancaster University, Lancaster, U.K., where he
is currently a Senior Lecturer with the School of Computing and
Communications. His research interests include network optimization, cyber
security, the Internet of Things, vehicular networks, information-centric
networking, digital twin, artificial intelligence, and cloud/fog computing.

Qingyang Wang is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree in data science and big data technology
with the School of Reading, Nanjing University
of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China.
His research interests include deep learning and
edge computing.

Xiaolong Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2016.
He is currently a Full Professor with the School of
Software, Nanjing University of Information Science
and Technology. He has published more than 100
peer-review articles in international journals and
conferences, including the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING , IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED
S YSTEMS, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS
IN C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S ERVICES C OMPUTING ,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NTELLIGENT T RANSPORTATION S YSTEMS, IJCAI, ICDM, ICWS, and
ICSOC. His research interests include edge computing, the Internet of Things,
cloud computing, and big data.
Prof. Xu was selected as the Highly Cited Researcher of Clarivate
(2021–2023). He received Best Paper Awards from Tsinghua Science and
Technology at 2023, the Journal of Network and Computer Applications at
2022, and several conferences, including IEEE HPCC 2023, IEEE ISPA 2022,
IEEE CyberSciTech 2021, and IEEE CPSCom2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:13:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

