2014 Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems

Individual Versus Difference Rewards on Reinforcement
Learning for Route Choice
Ricardo Grunitzki, Gabriel de O. Ramos, Ana L. C. Bazzan
Instituto de Informática/PPGC
UFRGS, Brazil.
Email: {rgrunitzki, goramos, bazzan}@inf.ufrgs.br
Abstract—In transportation systems, drivers usually choose their
routes based on their own knowledge about the network. Such a
knowledge is obtained from drivers’ previous trips. When drivers are
faced with jams they may change their routes to take a faster path.
But this re-routing may not be a good choice because other drivers can
proceed in the same way. Furthermore, such behavior can create jams
in other links. On the other hand, if drivers build their routes aiming
at maximizing the overall travel time (system’s utility), rather than their
individual travel time (agents’ utility), the whole system may beneﬁt.
This work presents two reinforcement learning algorithms for solving
the route choice problem in road networks. The IQ-learning uses an
individual reward function, which aims at ﬁnding a policy that maximizes
the agents’ utility. On the other hand, DQ-learning algorithm shapes the
agents’ reward based on difference rewards function, and aims at ﬁnding
a route that maximizes the system’s utility. Through experiments we show
that DQ-learning is able to reduce the overall travel time when compared
to other methods.

I.

shaping the agents’ reward. This reward function provides a reward
that is aligned with the overall system’s reward, thus allowing agents
to maximize the global system’s reward instead of individual agents’
reward.
In this paper, agents make decisions dynamically using their
experience, which is acquired through their interaction with the
environment. The environment is a road network that abstracts some
real-world characteristics, such as vehicle movement along roads,
allowing us to focus on the main subject, which is to discover
the route choice mechanism that maximizes the system’s utility
(in this case the overall travel time). Results show that the DQlearning improves the travel time in all cases evaluated in this work,
when compared against IQ-learning, successive averages, incremental
assignment, and all-or-nothing assignment. Comparing DQ-learning
and IQ-learning we show that DQ-learning has better performance
because the reward alignment to the system’s utility provided by
difference rewards function can distribute the agents over the network
in a better manner than IQ-learning.

I NTRODUCTION

Trafﬁc and mobility present challenging issues to authorities,
trafﬁc engineers, and researchers. This is due to the demand for
mobility in societies that has grown more than the investments in infrastructure (supply). To deal with the increasing demand, employing
techniques and methods to optimize the use of existing road networks
is attractive, since these methods mitigate the need for expensive and
environmental-impacting changes on the infrastructure.

In the next section we review the basics concepts of road trafﬁc
modeling (Sect. II-A), reinforcement learning (Sect. II-B), and difference rewards functions (Sect. II-C). Section III presents the related
work. Section IV presents our reinforcement learning approach (Sect.
IV-A), reward functions (Sect. IV-B), and route choice mechanism
(Sect. IV-C). Section V presents the scenario where the approaches are
evaluated, the parameters choice and implementation, and discusses
the results. Section VI concludes the paper and presents opportunities
for further investigation.

Trafﬁc assignment (or, alternatively, route assignment or trip
assignment) is largely used for trafﬁc modeling in transportation
system. Trafﬁc assignment methods select routes and attribute them
to travelers aiming at connecting their individual origins with their
individual destinations. The output describes the state of a transportation system, which is a relevant input for evaluating the consequences
of changes in the infrastructure.

II.
A. Road Trafﬁc Modeling

There are many works presenting trafﬁc assignment approaches to
model the interaction between the trafﬁc system and drivers decision
making. However, approaches such as [1], [2], depend on a central
authority to assign a speciﬁc route for each driver and do not consider
the behavior of the drivers along the trips. The main challenging in
modeling and controlling transportation systems is the difﬁculty (if
not impossibility) of a system manager to directly control the behavior
of the drivers in terms of their route choices.

A road network can be modeled as a graph, with a set of nodes
n ∈ N that represent intersections, and set of links j ∈ J between
these nodes, which represent the roads sections. The weight of a link
represents a form of cost associated with the link. For instance, the
cost can be travel time, fuel spent, or length.
The road network contains origins and destinations nodes that are
subsets of the set of nodes (OD-pairs). A driver’s trip consists of a set
of links, forming a route between his origin and destination nodes. In
a commuting scenario there are repeated trips, e.g., as drivers going
from home to work approximately in the same hour of the day during
the workdays.

In this work, we apply multiagent reinforcement learning to
simulate the effects of the agents’ route choice based on two reward functions, and apply them using the reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm Q-learning. The ﬁrst model, here called IQ-learning
(Individual Q-learning), shapes the agents’ reward based on partial
environment perception (current link), and aims at maximizing the
individual agents’ utility. The second model, DQ-learning (Difference
Q-learning), uses the difference rewards function, proposed by [3], for
978-1-4799-5618-0/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/BRACIS.2014.53

BACKGROUND

Drivers traveling through the road network generate trafﬁc ﬂow.
The simulation of this trafﬁc ﬂow can be done in macroscopic models,
which are faster to calculate and run, besides abstracting elements
not relevant for this problem (lanes changes, heterogeneous vehicles’
253

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

position and etc.). These models need a suitable cost function that
relates trafﬁc ﬂow and link’s attributes (such as capacity) to freeﬂow travel time. In this work, we use a function proposed by [4,
Exercise 10.1]:
tj (v) = fj + 0.02 ∗ v
(1)

reinforcement learning agents aim to maximize their own rewards,
a critical task is to create “good” agents’ rewards, or rewards that
when pursued by the agents lead to good overall system performance.
System’s utility is a function G (z) that rates the performance of the
full system, where z depends on the movement of all agents.

where, tj is the travel time on link j applied to the number of vehicles
(v), and fj is the free-ﬂow travel time on link j. This abstract function
increases tj by 0.02 of a minute for each vehicle/hour of ﬂow.

Difference rewards are functions proposed by [3] which aim
to provide a reward that is both sensitive to the agents’ actions
and aligned with the overall system reward. Consider the difference
rewards as in Eq. 4, where zi is the action of the agent i. All
components of z that are affected by agent i are replaced with the
ﬁxed constant ci .

B. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning deals with the problem of making an
agent learn a behavior by interacting with the environment. Usually,
the RL problem is modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP),
which is composed by a set of environment states S, a set of actions
A, a state transition function T : S × A → Π (S), where Π (S) is a
probability distribution over S, and a reward function R : S ×A → 
that returns the reward R (s, a) after a given action a ∈ A has been
taken in state s ∈ S. The functions T and R can be deﬁned as the
environment model.

Di ≡ G (z) − G (z − zi + ci )

Using a null vector in ci is equivalent to taking agent i out of
the system. Intuitively this causes the second term of the difference
rewards to evaluate the performance of the system without i and,
therefore, D evaluates the agent’s contribution to the system’s performance. According to [3], there are two advantages using Eq. 4
for D. First, the second term removes a signiﬁcant portion of the
impact of the other agents in the system and provides an agent with
a “cleaner” signal than G. This beneﬁt has been dubbed “learnability”
in previous work [7], [8]. Second, because the second term does not
depend on the actions of agent i, any action by agent i that improves
Di , also improves G. In other words, any action taken by agent i
that improves D, also improves G. This term measures the amount
of alignment between two rewards has been dubbed “factoredness”
in previous work [7], [8].

The learning job in an MDP is to ﬁnd a policy π : S → A
that maximizes the agent’s future reward. To maximize the reward
received throughout all interactions, the agent must select each action
according to a strategy that balances exploration (gain of knowledge)
and exploitation (use of knowledge). At each state the agent must
choose whether to exploit an already known action, or explore the
new alternative and potentially discover a more beneﬁcial action.
When exploiting, the agent must occasionally take random actions
to learn their reward, and potentially discover if they lead to states
of higher reward. According to [5], the balancing of exploration
and exploitation is a key design decision when implementing a RL
solution. One known exploration strategy is -greedy, which consist in
choosing random actions (exploration) with probability  = [0, 1] or
choosing best actions (exploitation) with probability 1 − . This way,
in the beginning,  has a high exploration, and decreases exponentially
for each episode λ ∈ Λ according to Eq. 2, where Δ represents the
epsilon decay rate in the interval [0, 1].
λ =  ∗ (Δ)λ

Difference rewards can be applied to any linear or nonlinear
system’s utility function. However, its effectiveness depends on the
domain, and on the interaction among the agents’ utility function [3].
III.

Q-learning is an algorithm that converges towards the optimal
policy, given certain conditions [6]. Its update rule is shown in Eq. 3,
where < s, a, s , R > is an experience tuple, meaning that the agent
performed action a in state s, reaching s , and receiving reward R.
Action a is one of the possible actions on s , α ∈ (0, 1] is the
learning rate, and γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor. Q (s, a) is an
entry indexed by state s and action a in the Q-table, which stores
the values (called Q-values) of each state-action pair. The Q-value
Q (s, a) is the expected discounted reward for executing action a at
state s and following the policy π thereafter. A complete description
of Q-learning can be found in [6].





a



RELATED WORK

Several approaches have been proposed to solve route choice
problems, many of them considering abstract trafﬁc scenarios. In
[9], a two-route scenario was studied to test the effect of realtime information sharing in drivers’ behavior. Such approach uses
reinforcement learning to reproduce human decision-making in a
commuting scenario with 45 agents. The results present relevant
aspects of the agents’ decision-making process, even though only
binary route choice scenarios were studied. In the present work, the
interest is in the evaluation of the route choice problem in a more
complex network, and with a higher number of agents than in [9].
In addition, instead of using a predeﬁned number of routes, in this
paper the routes are built dynamically along the episodes, i.e., during
the trip (en-route learning).

(2)

Q (s, a) → (1 − α) Q (s, a) + α r + γ max
Q s , a 


(4)

In [10] the authors applied multiagent reinforcement learning and
difference rewards functions to alleviate the trafﬁc congestion. They
proposed two reward functions, the ﬁrst one aiming to maximize
the individual agents’ reward, and the second aiming to maximize
the system’s utility. Although the results shown that the second
approach is more efﬁcient, the authors applied their algorithms to a
stateless abstract scenario, where there is only one OD-pair, and nine
independent routes. That problem is easier to be solved because there
is no shared link among routes, and the route choice process does
not change during the trip. Furthermore, the impact of an increased
number of agents was left aside.

(3)

C. Difference Rewards
The right selection of the reward structure for the learning agents
is an important step during the development of reinforcement learning
mechanisms. Most direct approaches let each agent receive the system
performance as its reward. However, according to [3], in many
domains such reward structure leads to slow learning. Given that

Multiagent reinforcement learning was applied for the route
choice problem in [11]. The authors use a re-routing mechanism that

254
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

needed because, in scenarios such as transportation systems, there is
a large number of agents interacting with the environment, and the
use of joint action learners is infeasible, as remarked in [12].

enables agents to change their routes dynamically during the trip. The
authors conclude that this approach is useful to compensate the lack of
adaptivity regarding trafﬁc management. They use 700 learning agents
in the problem to evaluate the approach in an abstract trafﬁc network
in format of a 6 × 6 grid. The reinforcement learning algorithm used
was the Q-learning.

The MDP model for this problem is as follows. An agent’s state is
the node at which it is located. The set of the actions are the outbound
links from the nodes of the network. In this approach, the agents do
not have a set of predeﬁned routes - from their origin to destination
-, the route is built dynamically during the episodes’ steps based on
their MDP (as described in Sect. IV-C). We refer to this approach
as en-route learning hereafter. The reinforcement learning algorithm
used is the Q-learning [6], and the exploration/exploitation policy
used is -greedy, with  decreasing exponentially.

In addition to the approaches based on reinforcement learning
algorithms cited before, there are centralized trafﬁc assignment approaches for assigning routes to vehicles [1], [2]. The most relevant
approaches are presented below. For an extensive explanation, please
refer to [4, Chapter 10], as shown next.
A simplest trafﬁc assignment method, called all-or-nothing assignment, is presented by [4, Section 10.3]. This method assigns all
trips to the route with the minimum cost. It assumes that there are
no congestion effects, that all drivers consider the same attributes
for route choice and that they perceive and weigh them in the same
way. No feedback loop is assumed between route selection and costs.
These assumptions are reasonable in sparse and uncongested networks
where there are few alternative routes and they are very different in
cost. If we assume congested networks this approach may not be a
good choice. For this kind of problem, trafﬁc assignment approaches
are proposed, as shown next.

Here we present two reinforcement learning approaches to solve
the route choice problem. Both of them, IQ-learning and DQlearning, use the same conﬁguration. However the reward functions
are not the same. The IQ-learning uses the individual reward function (described in Sect. IV-B1) whereas the DQ-learning uses the
difference rewards function (described in Sect. IV-B2).
B. Reward Functions
This section presents the functions used in this work for shaping
the reinforcement learners’ reward.

An incremental assignment method is presented by [4, Section 10.5.3]. In this process, fractions of trafﬁc volume are assigned
in steps. At each step, each link’s travel time is recalculated based
on its occupation. When many steps are performed, the ﬂows may
represent an equilibrium assignment. However, this method may not
yield an equilibrium solution.

1) Individual Reward Function: This reward function is used by
the IQ-learning and is given in Eq. 5, where tj is the travel time
function given in Eq. 1 applied to the number of vehicles vj on link
j. The reward increases as travel time decreases, thus drivers will
strive to maximize their individual travel times.
R = −tj (vj )

Iterative algorithms as the method of successive averages [4,
Section 10.5.4] were developed, at least partially, to overcome the
problem of allocating too much trafﬁc to low-capacity links. The algorithms ﬁnd an equilibrium assignment assuming inﬁnite iterations.
The load is determined using a repeated all-or-nothing assignment in
which costs are determined anew by mean trip distributions over all
previous iterations. The convergence may be very slow.

In this work, we call this reward function individual reward because it
is based just on the agents’ current state, which represents the system
portion where the agents have perception (considering they are not
receiving information from somebody).
2) Difference Rewards Function: The difference rewards function
is calculated as in Eq. 4. In this case, G (z) is calculated by Eq. 6.
G (z−i ) is calculated by Eq. 7, and ji represents the link where the
agent i is. Here, the term ci from Eq. 4 is removed because we used
a “null” value for it.

An approach which incrementally loads the trafﬁc demand onto
the network, and updates the trafﬁc conditions dynamically is proposed by [1]. The travel time depends of the shortest path algorithms
which determines the path with minimum cost for each OD-pair.
This method is applied to solve the dynamic solution of the problem
incrementally. However, the method depends on a central authority
assigning the route for each driver, without the driver learning or
adapting to the problem.

G (z) =



−tj (vj )

(6)

j∈J

G (z − zi ) =



−tj (vj )

(7)

j∈J\i

A genetic algorithm is proposed in [2] for solving the trafﬁc
assignment problem. In this approach, each vehicle has k available
routes generated by the Dijkstra algorithm. The vehicles’ route are
encoded as chromosomes in the algorithm genetic population. A
drawback in this approach is that vehicles are not able to change
their route during the trip. However, such approach is able to solve
problems with millions of trips and thousands nodes and links.
IV.

(5)

This way, the reward function is given by R = Di , which is
calculated based on the inﬂuence of the agent i in the system’s utility
G (z). In other words, it is analogous to agents knowing their actions’
inﬂuence over the other agents of the system.
C. Route Choice Mechanism
In this approach, the agents do not choose one path from their
origin to their destination. The route is built dynamically along their
interactions with the environment. Compared to implementations like
[9], [10], [13], which use a pre-established number of precomputed
routes, this problem is harder to be solved. In this work, the number
of valid routes for one OD-pair grows with the size of the network,
and if we consider that the agents can drive in loops, the number of

APPROACH AND SCENARIO

A. Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
In the present work, the agents (vehicles/drivers) are implemented
as independent learners, which ignore the existence of other agents.
In other words, joint actions are not modeled in their MDP. This is

255
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

256
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II.

T RAVEL TIMES IN MINUTES AND STANDARD DEVIATION PER OD- PAIR FOR THE COMPARED METHODS .
OD-pair
AL
AM
BL
BM
Overall

Trips
600
400
300
400
1700

DQ-learning
79.07 (0.27)
64.41 (0.31)
76.43 (0.44)
61.80 (0.33)
71.09 (0.13)

IQ-learning
81.25 (0.23)
67.86 (0.35)
78.56 (0.25)
64.32 (0.40)
73.64 (0.23)

Method
Inc. Assignment
96.20
83.80
93.40
79.80
88.93

route for their OD-pair, that is the fastest route. In the IQ-learning the
agent’s reward is aligned to the agent’s utility. It means that a learned
policy may be attractive to the agent but not for the system’s utility.
On the other hand, in the DQ-learning method the agents’ reward is
aligned to the system’s utility. In short, we intend to discover if these
reward alignment implies in the quality of the solutions reached by Qlearning algorithm, in a dynamic route choice problem, with inﬁnite
possible routes and many agents.

Suc. Averages
101.20
86.36
97.72
82.88
92.78

All-or-nothing
138.00
97.00
128.00
87.00
114.59

600
 500

D

I

80



 400



The results presented in Table II show that DQ-learning yielded
better results for all OD-pairs compared to the other methods. The IQlearning was better than incremental assignment, successive averages
and all-or-nothing assignment for all OD-pairs. The incremental
assignment method was better than successive averages and all-ornothing assignment. Obviously, the all-or-nothing assignment is not
the best method because in this scenario congestion arise in some
links due to too many drivers preferences for them. However, it can
be considered as a baseline for comparing against other methods.

75

300
 200

O

70
50

100

150

100
0
0

50

E 

100

150

Fig. 3. Convergence times and standard deviation along the episodes (main)
and in ﬁnal episodes (inset).

Compared with other methods, Q-learning-based approaches
present results signiﬁcantly better. In addition, they are independent,
and drivers do not depend on a central authority assigning their routes,
as occurs in successive averages, incremental assignment, and allor-nothing methods. In RL approaches, the agents are able to adapt
their routes dynamically according to the network conditions, whereas
in the other methods drivers’ route is known to the trafﬁc assigner,
which interfere on agents’ privacy. Furthermore, the implementation
in real world implies in communication between agents and the
central authority, which is not trivial.



:
9/
.*


,&
*+
&*

J
H











D. Individual Versus Difference Rewards: Convergence Time

()'
&%

In order to understand the effects of the reward alignment along
the simulation, for the reinforcement learning approaches, we also
evaluated the convergence time by means of the overall travel time.
Fig. 3 shows the convergence time and standard deviation for 30 runs.
Results show that the convergence times in main plot are very similar;
However, the inset plot shows that DQ-learning is able to reach better
solutions than IQ-learning. More speciﬁcally, from episode ≈ 75
onwards (the point at which the exploration ends) IQ-learning stops
converging to better solutions, whereas DQ-learning keeps improving
the overall travel time.

$ 
;!<="#<># <?#@ABC >F@A#
<" != #GC!@B?!<






 !"#





Fig. 4. Conﬁdence interval of d along the episodes (main) and in ﬁnal
episodes (inset).

In order to show the improvement provided by DQ-learning
over IQ-learning is statistically signiﬁcant, we present the following
comparison test. Assuming the results reached by DQ-learning and
IQ-learning in Fig. 3 at each point are independents, its values, qd and
qi , respectively can be deﬁned by Gaussian distributions. Thus, the
difference d = |qd − qi | is also deﬁned as a normal distribution. Fig.
4 shows the conﬁdence interval of d. In cases where the conﬁdence
interval does not contain the zero value it means that the results
are signiﬁcantly different (considering a conﬁdence level of 95%)
and consequently DQ-learning overcame IQ-learning at those points
(episode). As we can see in Fig. 4, the signiﬁcant results reached by
DQ-learning are more prevalent after the end of exploration.

Assuming that in RL methods the learning process is iterative
and needs a signiﬁcant number of episodes for the exploration period,
to consider these initial episodes to deﬁne the methods’ performance
may not be a good choice. Thus, for the interval conﬁdence presented
in Fig. 4, we evaluated for groups of 5 episodes the percentage times
in which DQ-learning is statistically better than IQ-learning along
the episodes, as shown in Fig. 5. In the initial episodes nothing can
be concluded about the algorithms performance because the agents’
have a high probability to behave randomly. However, after the end
of exploration DQ-learning overcomes IQ-learning more often. As
we can observe, at the ﬁnal episodes the algorithms’ performance

257
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

utility. Even though indirectly, in DQ-learning there is cooperation
among the agents to improve the system’s performance, whereas in
IQ-learning each agent behaves to improve its own performance.
Despite this, IQ-learning reached better solutions when compared to
other methods.
In a future work, we shall consider evaluating the effect of
heterogeneous learners (different learning algorithms) interacting in
the same environment. Moreover, due to the large number of episodes
needed for the route choice mechanism, knowledge-based algorithms
may be applied to speed up the learning process using the two reward
functions in the same agent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Ricardo Grunitzki and Ana L. C. Bazzan are partially supported
by CNPq and FAPERGS. All three authors are partially supported by
ITL. Jorge L. A. Samatelo has helped in data analysis.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 5. Percentage time for groups of 5 episodes in which DQ-learning
overcome IQ-learning.

[1]

stabilizes. It means that the ﬁnal learned policies by DQ-learning
improve the system’s performance when compared to IQ-learning.

[2]

This experiment showed that both methods presented equivalent
performance during the exploration period in the evaluated scenario. It occurs because Q-learning handles very well this kind of
domain. Furthermore, during the exploration period, drivers’ may
behave randomly. However, after the exploitation period, DQ-learning
reaches results statistically better than IQ-learning. The performance
improvement provided by the difference rewards is equivalent to
an average reduction of ∼
= 3.46% in travel time of all trips. It is
equivalent to a reduction of 2 minutes 44 seconds in drivers’ travel
time.
VI.

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

CONCLUSIONS

In this work we used a difference rewards function to shape
the agents’ reward and applied it on Q-learning algorithm to solve
the route choice problem. Here we call this approach DQ-learning.
The results obtained were compared against IQ-learning, in which
the reward function is based on agent’s utility. When the difference
function is applied to Q-learning, the learning process ﬁnds a policy
that maximizes the system’s utility, as opposed to IQ-learning, which
aims to maximize the agent’s utility.

[8]

[9]

[10]

In the experiments we evaluate the proposed approaches in a route
choice problem and compared them with three trafﬁc assignment
methods: all-or-nothing assignment, successive averages and incremental assignment. In the abstract scenario tested, the DQ-learning
was 3.46% better than IQ-learning. Compared to incremental assignment, successive averages, and all-or-nothing assignment, the DQlearning was between 20% and 40% better. For this same experiment
we evaluated the convergence time for Q-learning approaches. Results
showed that DQ-learning overcomes IQ-learning in convergence time
because the reward alignment to the system’s utility provided by
difference rewards is able to keep improving the agents’ solution
along the episodes, whereas IQ-learning stops improving agents’
solution at the beginning of exploitation period.

[11]

[12]

[13]

Shaping agents’ reward with difference utility function makes all
agents with a common objective, that is to maximize the system’s

C. Tong and S. Wong, “A predictive dynamic trafﬁc assignment model
in congested capacity-constrained road networks,” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 625 – 644, 2000.
L. S. Buriol, M. J. Hirsh, P. M. Pardalos, T. Querido, M. G. Resende, and
M. Ritt, “A biased random-key genetic algorithm for road congestion
minimization,” Optimization Letters, vol. 4, pp. 619–633, 2010.
K. Tumer and A. Agogino, “Distributed agent-based air trafﬁc ﬂow
management,” in Proceedings of the 6th international joint conference
on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2007, pp. 1–8.
J. Ortúzar and L. G. Willumsen, Modelling Transport, 3rd ed. John
Wiley & Sons, 2001.
R. Sutton and A. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine Learning,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 279–292, 1992.
A. Agogino and K. Tumer, “Multi–agent reward analysis for learning
in noisy domains,” in AAMAS ’05: Proceedings of the 4th International
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
F. Dignum, V. Dignum, S. Koenig, S. Kraus, M. P. Singh, and
M. Wooldridge, Eds., vol. II. New York, NY: ACM Computing Press,
July 2005, pp. 81–88.
K. Tumer and D. Wolpert, “A survey of collectives,” in Collectives
and the Design of Complex Systems, K. Tumer and D. Wolpert, Eds.
Springer, 2004, pp. 1–42.
E. Ben-Elia and Y. Shiftan, “Which road do I take? A learningbased model of route-choice behavior with real-time information,”
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, vol. 44, no. 4,
pp. 249–264, 2010.
K. Tumer, Z. T. Welch, and A. Agogino, “Aligning social welfare and
agent preferences to alleviate trafﬁc congestion,” in Proceedings of the
7th Int. Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
L. Padgham, D. Parkes, J. Müller, and S. Parsons, Eds.
Estoril:
IFAAMAS, May 2008, pp. 655–662.
A. L. C. Bazzan and F. Klügl, “Re-routing agents in an abstract trafﬁc
scenario,” in Advances in artiﬁcial intelligence, ser. Lecture Notes in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, G. Zaverucha and A. L. da Costa, Eds., no.
5249. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 63–72. [Online]. Available:
www.inf.ufrgs.br/maslab/pergamus/pubs/BazzanKluegl.pdf.zip
A. L. C. Bazzan, “Opportunities for multiagent systems and multiagent
reinforcement learning in trafﬁc control,” Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 342–375, June 2009. [Online].
Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/j1j0817117r8j18r/
A. R. Tavares and A. L. C. Bazzan, “Independent learners
in abstract trafﬁc scenarios,” Revista de Informática Teórica e
Aplicada, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 13–33, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://seer.ufrgs.br/rita/article/view/rita v19 n2 p13/23741

258
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:39:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

