2011 7th International Conference on IT in Asia (CITA)

Route Guidance System Using Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning
Mortaza Zolfpour Arokhlo, Ali Selamat, Siti Zaiton Mohd Hashim, Md Hafiz Selamat
Faculty of Computer Science & Information Systems
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
81310 UTM Skudai, Johor, Malaysia.

Abstract— Nowadays, the problems of urban traffic in most big
cities are more complex. Increasing population and road
requirements has caused the complexity in traffic management
systems. The main challenge for network traffic is to direct
vehicles to their destination with the aim of reducing travel
times and efficient use of available network capacity. This
paper proposes a new agent model and algorithm based on multiagent reinforcement learning to find a best and shortest path
between the origin and destination nodes. Furthermore, the
proposed algorithm is compared with Dijkstra algorithm to find
optimal solution using some simple real sample of Kuala Lumpur
(KL) road network map. Experimental results affirmed the same
results to find the optimal solutions.

I.
INTRODUCTION
Multi-agent system is considered as a problem solving
technique that consists of specific and nearly modular agents
specialized at solving a particular problem. In multi-agent
system, agents can be rather diverse. They can be cells in a
lattice representing pieces of land or representations of human
behavior [1]. Nowadays, many complex systems can be
studied, solved, managed and controlled by using multi-agent
systems [2]. The multi-agent system is gaining more
importance for software developers to execute tasks in complex
and dynamic environments. The agent has to adapt with the
current situation in order to accomplish the pre-programmed
tasks. The agent should be able to model a new process and
reinforcement learning, and interact with other agents. This
paper proposes a method to solve the shortest path problem in
route guidance systems in terms of accuracy and speed. The
results obtained from the approach have been compared with
Dijkstra algorithm [3]. The rest of the paper is organized as
follows. In Section 2, we describe some related studies on route
guidance system based on multi-agent reinforcement learning.
In Section 3, we discuss a proposed multi-agent reinforcement
learning method to improve the existing shortest path
algorithm. The simulation results and experimental
comparisons are discussed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.
The conclusions are discussed in Section 6.
II.

RELATED WORKS

Reference [4] studies the multi-agent system approach for
modeling of urban traffic systems [5]. From the studies, the
authors claimed that multi-agent reinforcement learning

approach is best suited for traffic detection and management [6,
7]. A new approach in which can reserve time and space for
cars at an intersection or junction is studied in [8]. However,
most agent based application was concentrated on modeling
and simulation. Therefore new efforts and researches should be
done for real world applications. In this research, we present a
route guidance system framework for solving urban road traffic
problems.
III.

PROPOSED AGENT MODEL

The proposed agent model for route guidance system is
shown in Figure 1. A route guidance system (RGS) calculates
the shortest path from the current vehicle position to
destination locations in order to minimize traveling cost or time
for drivers. We use shortest path computation (SPC) to
calculate the nearest distance of the destinations with the
support of installed agent in the RGS. The updated information
of the vehicle is used by the system to find the shortest path
from the current vehicle position to the destination zone for
drivers based on current conditions. We apply the roles of
agents in route guidance system as follows:
x

Transferring acquired information through the sensors;

x

Receiving route request from the vehicles;

x

Calculate the shortest path and send it to vehicles
drivers;

x

Receiving or sending information to other agents
(collaboration with other agents).

Figure 1. Proposed agent model for route guidance system.

A. Multi-agent Reinformanet Learning
We model the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
approach based on Figure 2. The elements of multi-agent
reinforcement learning are agent, policy, action, reward and
model of environment. In addition, the agent distinguishes an
input state. An action of the agent will be based on a policy

978-1-61284-130-4/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2011 7th International Conference on IT in Asia (CITA)
function embedded inside the agent that will be used for
decision making process. For a given state, the multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) must learn on a stated policy
to discover the best action. The policy will map the current
state of agent and what action it will take when the
environment changes.

Figure 2. The scheme of agent learning system.

The multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) finds
which actions to be taken and which rewards to be given to the
agents that accomplished the stated actions. Agent
communication is needed to send actions and receive rewards
between equipped vehicles and the environment. The agent is
installed in each intersection that communicates to its
environment by acquiring a new knowledge about road status
in that intersection and send road status to equipped vehicles.
In Figure 3, each agent detector consists of state recognizer
(1), RGS (2), an action selector (3), and policy (4). Route
connect in intersection is defined by a set of states which
s ^s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 ` . The state recognizer distinguishes an input
state of all routes connected to the current intersection. For a
given state, the model must learn on a stated policy in order to
choose the best actions that optimal reward. RGS (Figure 4) is
able to find the shortest path from the current vehicle position
to destination zone by the existing road network map. In
addition, the policy function maps the given state of vehicle
location and predicts what action it will take when the vehicle
driver requests a next road status. The installed agent in each
intersection performs as road status detector in intersection. It
can communicate with the equipped vehicles in order to send
and receive environment messages. The multi-agent system can
report the next road status in order to learn for making decision
for drivers to select which road to be used so that the journey is
short. The goal in a reinforcement learning problem is defined
by the reward function (rt) as shown in (1). The rewards
function (rt) is used in the literature. A positive reward is given
for an action that results in a goal, while small negative
rewards are given when the episode ends unsuccessfully. In
general, every time a player takes action in state ‘s’ and
receives reward ‘r’, it broadcasts a message of the form (s, a, r)
to the team.

Figure 4. Proposed shortest path algorithm for route guidance system.

+1 … ℎ    
=
−1 … ℎ    
TABLE I.
Node
1
2
3
4
5

State






(1)

AGENT COMMUNICATION MESSAGES

Action
Go straight
Go straight
Turn right
Turn right
Go straight

Output
This path is right
This path is right
This path has traffic
This path has traffic
This path is right

Reward
+1
+1
-1
-1
+1

The problem formulation and properties are introduced in
the next section.
B. Problem Formulation and Properties
A road directed graph represented by G = (V,A) is a
directed dynamic urban road network based on an electronic
map, a set of ‘N’ nodes (V) and ‘M’ directed edges(A). Each
R(s,d) edge is a nonnegative number that stands for the cost
while ‘s’ is a start node and ‘d’ is finish node connected to the
R(s,d). If S = {s1, s2, s3, …, sn}, D = {d, d, d, … … , d } then
R (,) = R ( , ) R ( , ) + +… … .. +R ( , ) .

Figure 3. Inter-agent communication structures.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2011 7th International Conference on IT in Asia (CITA)
R(s,d) consists the sum of all part edge distances (costs) that
is participating in the network path. According to the trip
origin (s) node and destination (d) node, this issue can be
solved as the optimization problem based on real transportation
network that is introduced as following:
! = 1 , / 02 3
45  6 7
(,) =min∑%#$ ∑"#$ ! &',* - 
! = 0 , 9ℎ 5

(2)

where
x

i and j are current state movement into right and
bottom side directions.

x

R (,) is the shortest path from a origin node, ‘s’ to a
last node, ‘d’.

x

α is binary digits ( 0 or 1).

x

Links are independent of each other.

The actual travel times can provide dynamic changes in
travel times at the current time. As mentioned in the previous
section, real-time information systems can be acquired by
applying video cameras, by using GPS and other devices on
transportation routes. In this paper, travel cost and edges
distance is assumed to be random variable [9, 10]. The route
Guidance System Algorithm is presented in the next section.
C. Route Guidance System Algorithm
Figure 5 shows the road network map of a part of Kuala
Lumpur (KL), the capital city of Malaysia. A grid network of
Figure 5 is drawn in Figure 6. The proposed algorithm (Figure
4) can also be used for finding shortest path from origin node
(i.e. node 1) to destination node in a road network graph. The
input of the algorithm consists of distances directed between
nodes as ‘r’ and a source data from origin and destination paths
as s, d in the network graph G. If the distance between two
nodes can be defined as path cost, the total cost of a network
graph is the sum of all route distance between nodes in a graph.

Figure 6. Optimal path in ideal route status (case 1).

The assumptions considered for the proposed algorithm (Figure
4) as following:
x

The road network is one-way and it is from left to right
and bottom direction.

x

There is the one-way directional connection between
all nodes.

x

The information of distance routes between all nodes
are existed before to start

x

The travel based on electronic map.
IV.

SIMULATION RESULTS AND EXPERIMENTAL
COMPARISON

In this section, simulation experiments have been carried
out on different network topologies for road networks that
consisting of 6 to 30 nodes with different edges (between 10 to
100 edges). For example, the results of the new approach that
is described in Section 3 are compared to Dijkstra algorithm
under the cases of network topologies (e.g. Case 1: with 16
nodes and 24 routes, and Case 2: with 20 nodes and 31 routes).
A. Case 1
1) Network graph source for 16 nodes
Figure 6 discovers the shortest path from the first node to
the last the node 16. The shortest path is drawn using Dijkstra
algorithm in Matlab software. The commands applies Dijkstra
algorithm as the default to find the optimal solution. The result
in Figure 6 shows the minimum distance(lowest cost) of the
graph is 17 and the shortest path from node 1 to node 16.

Figure 5. A part of Kuala Lumpur city road network map.

2) Using the proposed algorithm
Figure 7 shows the simulation minimum cost (i.e. distance)
and shortest path results from node 1 and other nodes to the last
node, 16. The number of node 1 (17) illustrates optimal
distance network graph from origin to destination node. Figure
7 shows the unique characteristic of this approach as compared

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2011 7th International Conference on IT in Asia (CITA)
to other shortest path algorithms. The shortest path or lowest
cost is calculated and suggested to vehicle drivers in each node
(intersection). When the agent reports the road traffic or
blocked in specific location the route of previous shortest path
to vehicle drivers, the vehicle driver turns to the next shortest
path priority. The simulation path result is acquired by using
the shortest path from the first node to node 16. The red
points of (1,17), (5,12), (9,10), (13,9), (14,5), (15, 1) and
(16,0) coordinates of the figures which shows the shortest path,
therefore the graph shortest path is node 1 ė node 5 ė node 9
ė node 13 ė node 14 ė node 15 ė node 16. Table II shows
the results obtain by using MARL in experimental cases. The
total traveling distance of using MARLS (20 vehicles as group
1) is 380km at average travel time of 1673s. And also group 2
that did not use the MARL messages, the total traveling
distance is 1360km at average travel time of 2194s. Therefore,
the second group obtains 521s as the average delay time and
the saving time is 23.75%.

Figure 7. minimum costs from each node to destination nodes (case 1).

B. Case 2
1) Network graph source for 20 nodes
Figure 8 shows a network graph topology that is used to
discover the shortest path from the first node to the last node
20. The shortest path is drawn Dijkstra algorithm in Matlab
software. Table II shows the results obtain by using MARL in
experimental cases. The total traveling distance of using
MARL (20 vehicles as group 1) is 621km at average travel
time of 2004s. And also group 2 that did not use the MARL
messages, the total traveling distance is 2160km at average
travel time of 2245s. Therefore, the second group obtains 241s
as the average delay time and the saving time is 10.75%.
2) Using the proposed algorithm
Figure 9 shows the minimum cost (i.e. distance) from node
1 and other nodes to last node, 20 are 27 according to proposed
algorithm in Figure 4. For example, the cost of node 1 to
destination node is 27. It illustrates an optimal distance from
first node to last node in network graph. The simulation path
result in Figure 9 shows the shortest path from the first node to
node 20. The minimum distance (cost) from node 1 and other
nodes to node 20 is 27. The number of node 1(27) illustrates
optimal distance network graph. In addition, the red color
point shows the shortest path from node1 to node 20 as
follows: node 1 ė node 2 ė node 6 ė node 7 ė node 11ė
node 12 ė node 16 ė node 20. The simulation program is
tested with other network graph information. The acquired
results affirmed the proposed algorithm results were the
convergence to acquire the shortest path in each network case.
Also, the algorithm proposed solution is performed when the
road network have blocked or congested because of traffic
congestion or accident. For these types of problems, there is
need to set for distance routes blocked with infinite value.
TABLE II.

Case
1
2

Route 1-5 only
Route 2-6, 6-7

Travel
Distance
(km)
380
620

Average
Travel
Time (s)
1673
2004

Figure 9. The minimum costs from each node to destination nodes (case 2).

V.

USING MARL EVALUATION

Road Segment &Traffic
Congestion

Figure 8. Optimal path in ideal route status(case 2).

Saving
Time (%)
23.75
10.75

DISCUSSIONS

A. Ideal Road Network Status
Figure 6 presents a transportation network which contains
12 horizontal routes and 12 vertical routes that they create 16
intersections (node). Intersections are numbered 1 to 16 so that
node 1 is considered as origin and node 16 is the road network
destination. The values of distance between each of two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2011 7th International Conference on IT in Asia (CITA)
intersections are generated randomly by numbers between 1
and 10. Also, the weight of node 1 is 17, and the weight of
node 2 is 12. Finally the weight of node 16 is 0. They are
calculated from the first part of the proposed algorithm
procedure. The weight of 17 is the shortest distance from node
1 to the last node (destination travel). The distance between
node 1 and node 16 (last node) is 17. Figure 6 presents the
optimal routes as follows: node 1 ė node 5 ė node 9 ė node
13 ė node 14 ė node 15 ė node 16.
B. Blocked Road Status
The numbers of the following assumptions are considered
in the proposed model:
x

If each intersection (node) an agent is installed and can
show the status of next routes traffic.

x

If one of the paths is blocked because of accident or
traffic congestion, the agent installed can inform
vehicle drivers that they are not allowed to use that
route. After that, the next route connected to node will
be selected as the prime priority.

Figure 10 shows the route between node 1 and node 5
which is blocked (let distance = Ğ) because of accident or
traffic congestion. Therefore, some connected routes are
removed automatically in the new optimal route computation
and next route, connected node 1 (i.e. node 2), is selected as
first choice route in this figure. However, the optimal path in
the blocked route status (Figure 10) is node 1 ė node 2 ė
node 6 ė node 7 ė node 11 ė node 15 ė node 16.

Figure 10. Optimal path in blocked route status

the vehicles to their destination. In addition, experimental
results are compared with Dijkstra algorithm. The proposed
algorithm is simulated to find the shortest path for many
network graphs cases from 6 nodes to 30 nodes with variety of
number of edges (10 to 100 edges) as shown in Figures 6
and 8. The proposed algorithm and Dijkstra algorithm
produced the same results in finding the shortest path.
However, this study is performed based on edge distances (or
cost) factor in the network graph but independent of time and
speed of vehicles. The unique characteristic of the proposed
algorithm as compared to other shortest path algorithms is that,
the shortest path (or lowest cost) is calculated and suggested to
vehicle drivers in each node (intersection). Therefore, when the
agent reports the road traffic (or blocked) in a specific route,
the vehicle driver turns to the next priority shortest path
priority.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM) under the Research
University Funding and Ministry of Higher Education under
FRGS scheme are gratefully acknowledged for the support of
the research.
REFERENCES
[1]

A. Ligtenberg, “Exploring the use of multi-agent systems for interactive
multi-actor spatial planning.” Ph.D. dissertation, Wageningen
University, 2006.
[2] L. Jiang and D. Y. Liu, “Advances in multi-agent coordination,” Proceedings of 2006 International Conference on Machine Learning and
Cybernetics, vols 1-7, pp. 125–130, 2006.
[3] G. Nagib and W. G. Ali, “Network routing protocol using genetic
algorithms,” International Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences,
vol. 10, pp. 40–44, 2010.
[4] M. Chabrol, D. Sarramia, and N. Tchernev, “Urban traffic systems
modelling methodology,” International Journal of Production
Economics, vol. 99, no. 1-2, pp. 156–176, February 2006.
[5] Z.-S. Y. Chang-Qing CAI, “Study urban traffic management based
multi-agent system,” in Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, Hong Kong, 25-29
August 2007, Hong Kong, 2007, pp. 25–29.
[6] B. Chen, Cheng, no.160, H. H., Palen, and Joe, Integrating mobile agent
technology with multi-agent systems for distributed traffic detection
and management systems. Kidlington, Royaume-Uni: Elsevier, 2009,
vol. 17.
[7] R. L. Q. Shi, “Study on integration of urban traffic control and route
guidance based on multi-agent technology,” in Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2003. Proceedings. 2003 IEEE, vol. 2, 2003,
pp. 1740 – 1744.
[8] M. Vasirani and S. Ossowski, “A market-inspired approach to
reservation-based urban road traffic management,” in AAMAS ’09:
Proceedings of The 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems. Richland, SC: International Foundation for
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2009, pp. 617–624.
[9] Z. L. Zou Liang, Xu Jian-Min, “Application of genetic algorithm in
dynamic route guidance system,” Journal of Transportation Systems
Engineering and Information Technology, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 45–48, 2007.
[10] X. Shi, J. M. Hu, Y. S. Xu, and J. Y. Song, “A simulation study
on agent-network based route guidance system,” 2005 IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp. 263–268, 2005.

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a new algorithm based on MARL
model for finding shortest and best path in the URN to conduct

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

