Network-aware Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for the
Vehicle Navigation Problem
Fazel Arasteh∗

Soroush SheikhGarGar

Manos Papagelis

arastehf@yorku.ca
EECS Department, Lassonde School
of Engineering,
York University
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

soroushs@eecs.yorku.ca
EECS Department, Lassonde School
of Engineering,
York University
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

papaggel@eecs.yorku.ca
EECS Department, Lassonde School
of Engineering,
York University
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

ABSTRACT

1

Traffic congestion is characterized by longer trip times, and increased air pollution. In a static road network, the travel time to
a destination is constant and can be computed using the shortest
path first algorithm (SPF). However, road network conditions are
dynamic, rendering the SPF to perform sub-optimally atbe times.
In addition, in a realistic multiple-vehicle scenario, the SPF routing
algorithm can cause congestion by routing all vehicles through
the same shortest path. In this paper, we propose a network-aware
multi-agent reinforcement learning model for addressing this problem. Our key idea is to assign an RL agent to intersections. Each
RL agent operates as a router agent and is responsible for providing routing instructions to approaching vehicles. When a vehicle
reaches an intersection, it submits a routing query to the RL agent
consisting of its final destination. The RL agent generates a routing
response based on (i) the destination, (ii) the current state of the
road network, and (iii) routing policies learned by cooperating with
other neighboring RL agents. Our experimental evaluation shows
that the proposed MARL model outperforms the SPF algorithm by
(up to) 20.2% in average travel time.

Traffic congestion in urban road networks is a condition characterized by longer trip times, and increased air pollution. The emergence
of new technologies like widely available internet connection, and
GPS data has enabled algorithmic traffic navigation [6]. Currently,
services like Google Maps1 and Waze2 help people with route planning mainly relying on a variant of the popular Shortest Path First
(SPF) algorithm [2]. In a static network and for a single vehicle,
the SPF algorithm is optimal. However, road network conditions
are not always static. In a dynamic road network, the SPF path
between an origin and a destination is harder to compute due to
variable traffic conditions. The main approach to address this issue
is to recursively breaking down the problem and estimating the
travel time for smaller road segments, where the traffic conditions
remain unchanged. This is usually referred to as the traffic prediction problem. Several methods have been proposed to address the
traffic prediction problem of a road segment, such as moving average models, Support Vector Regression, and Random Forest. More
recently, deep learning methods have been proposed to address the
traffic prediction problem [9, 13]. Still, the estimated travel times,
specifically long-term predictions, may be inaccurate, rendering
the global SPF algorithm to be sub-optimal at times.
Another drawback of the SPF algorithm is that in multiplevehicles scenarios, it will route every single vehicle through the
currently available shortest path. As a result, due to the limited
capacity of roads, the current shortest path gets quickly congested.
Other methods, such as probabilistic dynamic programming [11]
and ant colony optimization [8] have been proposed to directly
route the vehicles in the dynamic network. More recently, deep
reinforcement learning has also been proposed for end-to-end routing without individual road segment travel time prediction [3, 4, 7].
Moreover, graph convolution networks have been proposed to embed the structure of the road network and exploit together with
reinforcement learning for routing in large dynamic networks [12].
To adequately capture the semantics and conditions of the problem
that relates to its dynamic nature and optimization, we propose
the vehicle navigation problem; given a dynamic road network and
a fleet of vehicles, the objective is to minimize the overall travel
time of all vehicles. The vehicle navigation problem is novel and
it is different to the Shortest Path First problem; however it can
be reduced to it for the simple case of a static graph and a single
vehicle. The main idea of the vehicle navigation problem stems from
the packet routing problem in the IP network [1]. It is easy to see the

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Multi-agent reinforcement
learning; • Applied computing → Transportation.

KEYWORDS
multi-agent reinforcement learning, adaptive vehicle navigation,
intelligent transportation systems, Graph Attention Network (GAT)
ACM Reference Format:
Fazel Arasteh, Soroush SheikhGarGar, and Manos Papagelis. 2022. Networkaware Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for the Vehicle Navigation Problem. In The 30th International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (SIGSPATIAL ’22), November 1–4, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1145/
3557915.3561005
∗ The

code
for
this
research
is
https://github.com/FazelYU/Adaptive-Navigation

publicly

available

at

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGSPATIAL ’22, November 1–4, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9529-8/22/11.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1145/3557915.3561005

INTRODUCTION

1 https://maps.google.com/
2 https://www.waze.com/

SIGSPATIAL ’22, November 1–4, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Fazel Arasteh, Soroush SheikhGarGar, and Manos Papagelis

analogy — vehicles are continuously routed from one intersection
to another until they reach their destination, similarly to how IP
packets are routed from one router to another. In our context, to
address the vehicle navigation problem, we propose a network-aware
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) model. Specifically, in
our MARL model, an RL agent is assigned to every intersection.
When a vehicle approaches to an intersection, it submits a routing
query to the agent, including its final destination. The agent generates a routing response based on the vehicle’s final destination and
the current state of the road network traffic. The vehicle follows the
instructions of the routing response, including the next intersection.
The process continues until the vehicle reaches its final destination.
Note that the vehicle doesn’t need to know its exact route to its
destination.

We denote the length of path as |𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ| = 𝑧, and the last element of
the path as 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ |𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ | = 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞𝑧 ). We denote the set of all paths as
𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑠 = {𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝)|𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝 ∈ 𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑠}.

2

We now formally define the adaptive navigation problem:

PROBLEM DEFINITION

Consider a road network represented as a directed graph 𝑊 =
{𝐼, 𝑅}, where 𝐼 = {𝑖 1, ..., 𝑖 𝑁 } is a set of vertices that represent the
intersections, and 𝑅 = {𝑟 1, ..., 𝑟 𝑀 } is a set of edges that represent
the roads. A road 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 is a directed edge from 𝑟 -ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 ∈ 𝐼 to
𝑟 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 ∈ 𝐼 . This assumption means that every road connects two
intersections. Also, consider a set of L vehicles 𝑉𝐶𝑠 = {𝑣𝑐 1, ..., 𝑣𝑐 𝐿 },
and 𝑁 router agents 𝑈 = {𝑢 1, ..., 𝑢 𝑁 } each corresponding to an
intersection. When a vehicle approaches an intersection it generates
a routing query. We first define a routing query:
Definition 1. 𝑞: routing query A query for routing at time 𝑡
generated by vehicle 𝑣𝑐 that is currently driving in the road 𝑟𝑐 , to
the router 𝑢, the agent assigned to the intersection 𝑟𝑐 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 3 , with the
destination intersection 𝑖𝑑 . 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the deadline for arriving.
The router 𝑞-𝑢 at the end of the current road of the vehicle generates
a routing response to the routing query 𝑞. To define a routing
response, we first define the next-hop roads set:
Definition 2. 𝑁 𝐻 (𝑟 ): next-hop road set of road 𝑟 the set of
all the outgoing roads from intersection 𝑟 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 that are connected to
𝑟 . We say that 𝑟𝑘 is connected to 𝑟 if the road network structure at
intersection 𝑟 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 allows the flow of traffic from 𝑟 to 𝑟𝑘 .
Definition 3. 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞) : routing response to query 𝑞

 < 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 >,
𝑖 𝑓 𝑞-𝑟𝑐 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 == 𝑞-𝑖𝑑



𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞) = < 𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑙 >,
𝑖 𝑓 𝑞-𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 < 𝑞-𝑡


 < 𝑟 ∈ 𝑁 𝐻 (𝑞-𝑟𝑐 ) >, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒

The routing response 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞) can be 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠, 𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑙, or the next road
to take. We next define the trip and the path for a vehicle:

Definition 6. 𝑡𝑡 (𝑝): travel time of path 𝑝 is the difference
between time of the last and fist queries of the path 𝑝.
We next define the routing success of an episode to know about
the number of 𝑣𝑐 that reached their destination. Also, we define the
average travel time for all the 𝑣𝑐s that reach their destination:
Definition 7. 𝑅𝑆: Routing Success is the the set of paths that
end up in a < 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 > routing response.
Definition 8. 𝐴𝑉𝑇𝑇 : average travel time The average travel
time of all the paths that end up in <success>.

Problem 1. Adaptive Navigation Consider a locally accessible
road network 𝑊 , and a set of routing queries 𝑄, our problem is to
generate a response 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞) for each 𝑞 ∈ 𝑄 to (1) 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒 |𝑅𝑆| while
(2) 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐴𝑉𝑇𝑇 .

3 METHODOLOGY
3.1 MARL Formulation
In this section we present our MARL methodology [14].
Router agent at intersection 𝑖, 𝑢𝑖 . We assign a unique agent 𝑢𝑖
to intersection 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 . Agent 𝑢𝑖 only responds to the queries 𝑞 ∈ 𝑄
with 𝑞-𝑟𝑐 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙 == 𝑖.
State of query 𝑞, 𝑠𝑞 . The state of query 𝑞, is the unique representation of the destination intersection [𝑞-𝑖𝑑 ].
State of intersection 𝑖, 𝑠𝑖𝑡 . State of intersection 𝑖 at time 𝑡 consists
of the traffic congestion condition in its outgoing roads. A road is
considered congested (𝐶 (𝑟 ) == 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒) if its current speed is smaller
than a fixed portion of the free-flow speed of the road.
𝑡 . The state of the road
State of road network 𝑊 at time 𝑡, 𝑠𝑊
network W at time 𝑡 is the concatenation of the states of all intersections.
State of query 𝑞 at step 𝜏, 𝑠𝑞𝜏 . Assume that 𝜏 is the index of 𝑞 in the
path of vehicle 𝑞-𝑣𝑐. State of query 𝑞 at step 𝜏 is a tuple consisting
of the state of the query and the state of the network at that time.
Action of agent 𝑢𝑖 for 𝑠𝑞𝜏 , 𝑎(𝑠𝑞𝜏 ). Selecting one of the outgoing
road-segments of the intersection 𝑖 = 𝑞-𝑟𝑐 -𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙.
Next state of 𝑠𝑞𝜏 , 𝑠𝑞𝜏+1 . Assume that 𝑞 ′ is the 𝜏 + 1 query in path of
vehicle 𝑞-𝑣𝑐.
Reward, 𝑟 (𝑎(𝑠𝑞𝜏 )). Assume that 𝑞 ′ is the 𝜏 + 1 query in path of
vehicle 𝑞-𝑣𝑐:
Δ𝑇 = (𝑞 ′ -𝑡) − (𝑞-𝑡)

Definition 4. 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝: trip of vehicle 𝑣𝑐 the trip of vehicle 𝑣𝑐 starting at time 𝑡 from road 𝑟 with a destination intersection 𝑖.
We denote the set of all the trips as 𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑠 = {𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝 |𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝-𝑣𝑐 ∈ 𝑉𝐶𝑠}.
Definition 5. 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝): path of 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝
𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝) = (𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞 1 ), ..., 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞𝑧 ) =< 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 > /< 𝑓 𝑎𝑖𝑙 >)
is a sequence of routing responses for vehicle 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑝-𝑣𝑐.
3We

use a short hyphen (-) to refer to an attribute of an object

𝑟 (𝑎(𝑠𝑞𝜏 )) = −Δ𝑇

3.2

(1)

Model Architecture

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the Adaptive Navigation algorithm. The destination of the routing query 𝑞, is forwarded to the
agent 𝑢𝑖 = 𝑞-𝑢, and goes through its linear layer and produces
embeddings of the destination IDs:
[𝑠𝑞 ] = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖 (𝑠𝑞 ))

Network-aware Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for the Vehicle Navigation Problem

SIGSPATIAL ’22, November 1–4, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

(a) Synthetic network (5x6 grid)

(b) Downtown Toronto

Figure 2: Road Network Datasets
Figure 1: Adaptive Navigation Model Architecture

𝑡 is passed to the GAT model as a graph signal
The network state 𝑠𝑊
and produces intersection state embeddings:
𝑡
𝑠𝑖′ = (𝐺𝐴𝑇 (𝑠𝑊
))𝑖
′
The concatenation of [𝑠𝑞 ] and 𝑠𝑖 is passed to the Q-network of
agent 𝑢𝑖 to get the Q-values of the actions. The routing response is
the action with the highest Q-value:

AN(h=2)
AN(h=1)
AN(h=0)
Q-routing
SPF
SPFWR

D.T Toronto
479.3
476.4
477.6
∞
551.7
475.6

Grid
145.4
138.4
143.7
159.6
173.4
205.1

Table 1: Testing Results: Average Travel Time (AVTT)

𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝 (𝑞) = argmax 𝑄𝑖 (𝑠𝑞𝜏 , 𝑎)
𝑎

We follow the conventional MSE loss (2) in the Q-learning algorithm
per agent, where 𝛾 is the discount factor, and 𝑄𝑖+1 is the Q-network
of the next agent. Note that the training of the agents is intertwined.
𝐿(𝑠𝑞𝜏 , 𝑎, 𝑟 : 𝜃 ) = E[(𝑟 + 𝛾 max
𝑄𝑖+1 (𝑠𝑞𝜏+1, 𝑎 ′ ) − 𝑄𝑖 (𝑠𝑞𝜏 , 𝑎) 2 ]
′

(2)

𝑎

Back-propagating the loss leads to end-to-end optimization of all
the network parameters 𝜃 . Note that all agents contribute to the
training of the GAT while only optimizing their own Q-network.

4 EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
4.1 Experimental Setup
For the traffic simulation purposes, we used Simulation of Urban
Mobility (SUMO) [5]. We used the SUMO-provided python API,
TraCI, for interacting with the simulation. For our experimental
evaluation, we used both synthetic and realistic networks with synthetic traffic data.
Synthetic Network. We considered a synthetic network based on
the regular lattice network model that resembles a Manhattan-like
urban road network. The lattice network is “regular” because each
inner node has exactly the same number of edges (i.e., four in our
case). Figure 2a shows the topology of our synthetic network, a 5x6
lattice/grid network, where 26 routing agents are assigned, one at
each intersection (except for the corner ones).
Realistic Network. We considered the realistic road network of
an urban area (downtown Toronto). We extracted the road network
structure from Open Street Maps4 , and abstracted it by removing
the less important roads (e.g., one-lane roads). At the end, we are
left with 52 intersections that are each assigned a routing agent.
Figure 2b shows the abstracted network of downtown Toronto.
Traffic Data. Since we don’t have access to the detailed real-world
traffic demands, we turn to use synthetic traffic demands consisting
4 https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright

of a uniform demand, a biased demand, and stochastic congestion. Uniform Demand: the Uniform Demand is a set of origindestination tuples distributed uniformly in the road network. Biased Demand: the Biased Demand is a set of user-defined origindestination tuples. Congestion: we simulate congestion in a road
by reducing its allowed speed by a fixed ratio. With a fixed period,
we apply a network state change, in which every road is prone to
congestion with a predefined probability.
4.1.1 Baselines. We used three baselines for our evaluations:
Travel Time Shortest Path First (SPF): This method finds the
path with the shortest travel time in the current situation of the
network using the SPF algorithm.
Travel Time Shortest Path First with Rerouting (SPFWR):
This method is similar to the previous method. However, every
time the vehicle reaches an intersection, we recompute the shortest
path based on the new traffic situation.
Q-routing (QR) [1]: As another baseline, we implemented a deep
reinforcement learning version of the Boyan, and Litman Q-routing
for packet routing. This baseline is not aware of the network state.
These baselines are compared against three variants of our Adaptive
Navigation method. AN(h=0): In this version, only the immediate
intersection state is used as input to the router agents. AN(h=1): In
this version, we apply one layer of GAT to the network state and
then pass layer-1 embedding to the router agent. AN(h=2): In this
version, we apply two layers of GAT to the network state and pass
the layer-2 embedding to the router agent.
4.1.2 Evaluation Metric. Following the previous works [10] in traffic optimization, we use the average travel time defined in definition
8 as our primary evaluation metric.

SIGSPATIAL ’22, November 1–4, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

(a) AVTT (Toronto)

(b) AVTT (5x6 Grid)

Fazel Arasteh, Soroush SheikhGarGar, and Manos Papagelis

the 5x6 grid network, AN(h=1) outperforms the other algorithms.
Counter-intuitively, SPFWR has the worst performance in this case.
The network structure and its traffic capacity, e.g., number of lanes
per road play an important role in the SPFWR performance. A road
that has only one lane can easily get congested. SPFWR greedily
sends all the vehicles to the current shortest path and congests it
so that it is no longer the shortest path. Moreover, SPFWR does
not consider the waiting times in the traffic lights queues. Current
experiments show that adding an extra layer of GAT does not
necessarily improve the results since the extra layer increases the
model parameters leading to the performance decay.

5

(c) AVTT (Toronto, last 100 episodes)

(d) AVTT, (5x6 Grid, last 100 episodes)

(e) Routing Success (Toronto)

(f) Routing Success (5x6 Grid)

Figure 3: Average Travel Time (AVTT) and Routing Success during
800 training episodes for Toronto (a,b, and c) and 5x6 Grid (d,e,f)

4.2

Performance Evaluation

Training In the training phase, we define an episode as a fixed
number of simulation time steps. We don’t set a deadline for arrival. For every episode we report, the Routing Success (number
of vehicles that reached their destination during this episode), and
Average Travel Time (for vehicles that reached their destination).
Figures 3a and 3b, show the training results for 800 episodes of
training for Downtown Toronto and 5x6 Grid network respectively.
Figures 3c, 3d show the average travel time in the final episodes. In
figures 3a,3c,3b,3d the Y-axis shows the average travel time in seconds, and the X-axis shows the episode number. In figures 3e, and
3f the Y-axis shows the number of vehicles that have successfully
arrived at their destination in that episode (|Routing Success|), and
the X-axis shows the episode number.
Testing for testing purposes, to avoid the random noises, instead
of having a flow, we predefined 2000 uniform trips. An episode
in the testing phase lasts as long as all the vehicles reach their
destination. Table 1 shows the average results of 5 episodes in the
testing phase. In the Downtown Toronto network, SPFWR has the
best performance, and AN(h=1) marginally stands in second place.
It is important to note that the goal is not to outperform
the SPFWR. SPFWR needs to compute all-pairs-shortest-path in
every time-step rendering it to be computationally infeasible if the
response time is important. In this experiment, Q-routing fails to
route all the vehicles successfully since it creates infinite loops. In

CONCLUSIONS

The SPF algorithm is the predominant algorithm for routing in a
static network. However, it proves sub-optimal in a dynamic network. In this paper, we introduced the adaptive navigation problem.
Specifically, we assigned a Q-learning agent to every intersection,
which is responsible for the routing of all incoming vehicles to
that intersection. The router agent uses the destination ID of the
approaching vehicle, and the traffic state of its neighborhood for determining the next intersection the vehicle should be forwarded to.
Our empirical evaluation demonstrated a substantial improvement
of up to 20.2% in average travel time, compared to the SPF-based
baselines, for both synthetic and realistic networks.

REFERENCES
[1] Justin A Boyan and Michael L Littman. 1994. Packet routing in dynamically
changing networks: A reinforcement learning approach. In Advances in neural
information processing systems. 671–678.
[2] Edsger W Dijkstra. 1959. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs.
Numerische mathematik 1, 1 (1959), 269–271.
[3] Yuanzhe Geng, Erwu Liu, Rui Wang, Yiming Liu, Weixiong Rao, Shaojun Feng,
Zhao Dong, Zhiren Fu, and Yanfen Chen. 2021. Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Dynamic Route Planning for Minimizing Travel Time. In 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Communications Workshops). IEEE, 1–6.
[4] Songsang Koh, Bo Zhou, Hui Fang, Po Yang, Zaili Yang, Qiang Yang, Lin Guan,
and Zhigang Ji. 2020. Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle
navigation. Applied Soft Computing Journal 96 (11 2020), 106694.
[5] Pablo Alvarez Lopez, Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, Jakob Erdmann, YunPang Flötteröd, Robert Hilbrich, Leonhard Lücken, Johannes Rummel, Peter
Wagner, and Evamarie Wießner. 2018. Microscopic Traffic Simulation using
SUMO. In The 21st International Conf. on Intelligent Transportation Systems. IEEE.
[6] Arzoo Miglani and Neeraj Kumar. 2019. Deep learning models for traffic flow
prediction in autonomous vehicles: A review, solutions, and challenges. Vehicular
Communications 20 (2019), 100184.
[7] Aleksandr I Panov, Konstantin S Yakovlev, and Roman Suvorov. 2018. Grid
path planning with deep reinforcement learning: Preliminary results. Procedia
computer science 123 (2018), 347–353.
[8] Bogdan Tatomir, Leon JM Rothkrantz, and Adriana C Suson. 2009. Travel time
prediction for dynamic routing using ant based control. In Proceedings of the 2009
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). IEEE, 1069–1078.
[9] David Alexander Tedjopurnomo, Zhifeng Bao, Baihua Zheng, Farhana Choudhury, and AK Qin. 2020. A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic
prediction: Trends, methods and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering (2020).
[10] Hua Wei, Guanjie Zheng, Vikash Gayah, and Zhenhui Li. 2019. A survey on
traffic signal control methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08117 (2019).
[11] Lin Xiao and Hong K. Lo. 2014. Adaptive vehicle navigation with stochastic traffic
information. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2014).
[12] Jiaming Yin, Weixiong Rao, and Chenxi Zhang. 2021. Learning Shortest Paths on
Large Dynamic Graphs. In 2021 22nd IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data
Management (MDM). 201–208. https://doi.org/10.1109/MDM52706.2021.00040
[13] Xueyan Yin, Genze Wu, Jinze Wei, Yanming Shen, Heng Qi, and Baocai Yin. 2021.
Deep Learning on Traffic Prediction: Methods, Analysis and Future Directions.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021).
[14] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. 2021. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of
Reinforcement Learning and Control (2021), 321–384.

