2023 3rd International Conference on Electronic Information Engineering and Computer (EIECT) | 979-8-3503-5770-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/EIECT60552.2023.10442929

2023 3rd International Conference on Electronic Information Engineering and Computer (EIECT)

Optimization Method of DRL-based Route Planning
under Limited Resources
1st Chenhao Jin
Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Navigation and Communication
Integration
Shenzhen, China
jinchh5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

2nd Xi Zhang
Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Navigation and Communication
Integration
Shenzhen, China
zhangx589@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

3rd Yiqian Zhang
Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Navigation and Communication
Integration
Shenzhen, China
zhangyq75@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

4th Congduan Li*
Sun Yat-sen University,
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Navigation and Communication
Integration
Shenzhen, China
licongd@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract—The performance of the route planning module is
affected by the on-board computing and storage capabilities,
which are growing rapidly but are still limited by the enormous
scale of sensed data that need to be stored and processed. So,
aiming at the problems of resource-limited deep reinforcement
learning-based route planning methods, this paper proposes an
optimization method to improve computational effectiveness by
using Attention Mechanism and reduce data storage by using
improved Double-DQN. The results show that the proposed
method enables the planning model to focus on valid sensed
information and ignore irrelevant information, as well as
effectively reduce the amount of vehicle agent's experience data
storage during environment exploration.

Recent years, research in Deep Learning (DL) has also been
extended to the field of route planning [2][3]. The property of
deep neural networks (DNN) structure allows it to learn the hardto-perceive regular features directly from the raw data, and avoid
processing complex data manually, thereby can reduce errors
and information losses during the process. So DL models can
adapt to different data distributions and scenarios, handle highdimensional data efficiently, and have better scalability. [4]
proposed a self-attention mechanism based end-to-end AD
method, which improves the robustness of AD by using an
adaptive fusion mechanism “TransFuser” [5] to achieve a
comprehensive perception of the traffic environment. [6]
proposed a flexible and efficient feature representation: Neural
Attention fields (NEAT) to address the challenging problem of
joint BEV semantic prediction and vehicle trajectory planning
from camera inputs on the CARLA simulator, which takes a step
towards interpretable and high-performance end-to-end AD. [7]
proposed a DL method to combine trajectory planning and direct
control for end-to-end AD. End-to-End Learning-based adaptive
fusion scheme may be a possible future direction, but the
superiority of these approach relies on the complexity of the
model framework and the large amount of data with labels.
Firstly, under the limited on-board computing resources, the
real-time performance of these methods is difficult to guarantee.
Additionally, obtaining high-quality labelled data is extremely
challenging, as such data usually involves personal privacy and
security issues.

Keywords—route
planning,
resource-constrained,
reinforcement learning, Attention Mechanism

deep

I. INTRODUCTION
The development of autonomous driving (AD) technology
and V2X makes the on-board route navigation system more and
more intelligent, which significantly improves traffic efficiency.
The capability of the on-board route navigation module is
directly related to the vehicle's route selection and driving
smoothness, which depends on the performance of underlying
planning algorithm. An Intelligent Connected Vehicle (ICV) can
collect at least 10TB data per day, including vehicle
geographical location, in-car and external environment data, and
data from the Internet of Vehicle (IoV), so with limited on-board
resources, how to use the large amount of information to plan a
suitable path in real-time is an important challenge for current
route planning technology.

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [8] is an important
branch of artificial intelligence that addresses an important
problem in machine learning --- sequential decision making, a
task that uses previous experience to decide how to take a series
of actions in the environment so that the final target can be
reached. DRL defines the problem as an intelligence agent,
which allows the agent to interact with the environment
continuously and collect experiences to learn how to act by
obtaining the accumulated rewards from the environment. The
environment can be stochastic. The agent can observe only part

Traditional global planning algorithms, such as Dijkstra's
algorithm, the A* family and the RRT family [1], have been
proved to obtain optimal solutions theoretically. However, these
algorithms have high computational complexity and low realtime performance, which cannot obtain the optimal solution
under limited computing resources, and they are not suitable for
route planning in dynamic environments.
979-8-3503-5770-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

161

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of the information in the current state, and the observed
information can be high-dimensional. So DRL is suitable for
application in any kind of experience-based sequential decision
making tasks like route planning [9] (Figure 1). [10] proposed a
route planning with dynamic obstacle avoidance method of the
manipulator based on a DRL algorithm soft actor-critic (SAC),
this method can effectively avoid moving obstacles in the
environment by designed a comprehensive reward function of
dynamic obstacle avoidance and target approach. [11] proposed
a novel DRL-based vehicle routing optimization method which
is suited for real-time smart vehicle navigation. In the current
research on route planning algorithms, the actual situation of
limited on-board resources is rarely taken into account. So in this
paper, we propose an optimization scheme for DRL-based route
planning considering the limited on-board computing and
storage resources. Our main contributions are as follows,

information during driving, in order to reach the destination with
the shortest distance, the least driving time, etc. The basic
mathematical model is represented as follows:
𝑚𝑖𝑛

𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑗 =

∑

𝑎𝑢𝑣 𝑝𝑢𝑣

𝑒(𝑢,𝑣)∈𝐸(𝐷)

𝑠. 𝑡. ∑𝑉

𝑝𝑢𝑣
𝑣=1
𝑒(𝑢,𝑣)∈𝐸(𝐷)

− ∑𝑉

𝑝𝑣𝑢
𝑣=1
𝑒(𝑣,𝑢)∈𝐸(𝐷)

1,
𝑢=𝑖
= {−1, 𝑢 = 𝑗 , (1)
0, 𝑢 ≠ 𝑖, 𝑗

where 𝐸(𝐷) denotes the set of all edges in network, 𝑉 denotes
the number of network points and 𝑝𝑢𝑣 denotes the decision
variable. When 𝑝𝑢𝑣 = 1, it means that the path 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) belongs
to the set 𝐸𝑖𝑗 (𝐷) which consisting of all paths that can reach the
destination 𝑗 from the origin 𝑖 ( 𝐸𝑖𝑗 (𝐷) ∈ 𝐸(𝐷) ), otherwise
𝑝𝑢𝑣 = 0. The purpose of the constraint is to find all possible
paths from the origin 𝑖 to the destination 𝑗. When the 𝑎𝑢𝑣 is a
deterministic value, the route planning turns to a problem for
searching an optimal solution under the static deterministic
condition, while for the case of minimal driving time, the weight
𝑎𝑢𝑣 is determined by the multidimensional dynamic
environmental characteristic information:

(1) The attention mechanism is introduced to design the
policy network of DRL, and the Query vector is carefully
designed to be highly relevant to the optimization goal, so that
our method can effectively filter the information useful for
planning from the high-dimensional environment state
information with fewer neurons under the limited computing
resources.

𝑖 𝑖
𝑎𝑢𝑣 = ∑𝑁
𝑖=0 𝑘 𝑥𝑢𝑣 ,

(2) The improved Double-DQN is designed for the training
process of the vehicle agent, in which the vehicle agent only
needs to store information that is valuable for model training,
while avoiding storing a large amount of invalid information
with limited on-board storage resources.

(2)

where 𝑥 is the characteristic information of the real-time traffic
network. In this case, the traffic flow is random, and the road
capacity also shows different random characteristics at different
time periods, so the route planning turns to a stochastic
programming problem under dynamic network. Define 𝑇 =
𝑡𝑢𝑣 |𝑡𝑢𝑣 ∈ 𝑇𝑢𝑣 } as the vehicle's duration on the edge of 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣),
and the expectation value mathematical model of the stochastic
planning problem can be expressed as:

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
models the route planning problem and expounds the feasibility
and limitations of the classical DRL. Section III describes our
proposed algorithm in detail. Section IV analyzes the simulation
results of our algorithm and conclusions are provided in Section
V.

𝑚𝑖𝑛

𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑗 = 𝐸 [

∑

𝑡𝑢𝑣 𝑝𝑢𝑣 ]

𝑒(𝑢,𝑣)∈𝐸(𝐷)

𝑠. 𝑡. ∑𝑉

𝑣=1
𝑒(𝑢,𝑣)∈𝐸(𝐷)

1,
𝑢=𝑖
−1,
𝑢
=𝑗 .
𝑝
=
{
𝑣=1
𝑣𝑢
𝑒(𝑣,𝑢)∈𝐸(𝐷)
0, 𝑢 ≠ 𝑖, 𝑗
(3)

𝑝𝑢𝑣 − ∑𝑉

In the dynamic environment, planning methods need to
consider not only better routes whether they can find to the
destination, but also the stability of the model when dealing with
road networks of different complexity and congestion
B. Deep Reinforcement Learning
The choice of the road in the planning problem only depends
on the vehicle's current location but not the historical states,
which is Markov property and can be represented by the Markov
decision process (MDP):

Figure 1. Deep reinforcement learning for route planning.

II. PROBLEM STATEMENT

< 𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑇, 𝑅, 𝛾 >,

A. Mathematical Model
For realistic vehicle navigation, the route planning problem
can be described as how to provide an appropriate driving route
for a vehicle which knows a single origin 𝑖 to the single
destination 𝑗 with the initial road network information
(adjacency matrix), and also be able to adjust the driving route
in real time according to the subsequent changes in road network

(4)

where 𝑆 represents the set of vehicle's state space, including all
dynamic and static traffic information on the map, 𝐴 represents
the set of paths that the vehicle can choose at each junction. The
vehicle's path choice must obey the traffic rules, so the action
dimensions that vehicle can choose are dynamically changing at
each junction. 𝑇 is the state transition probability matrix, and is
uncertain in route planning problems. 𝑅 is the reward or penalty
162

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

feedback by the environment after the vehicle chooses an action.
γ is defined as the discount factor, which can control the impact
of future states on current decision-making behavior.

by bootstrap, but it does not help to mitigate the overestimation
caused by maximization. Instead of choosing the maximum 𝑄value directly, DDQN uses the EvalNet to choose 𝑄 -values
obtained from the TargetNet, that can alleviate the
overestimation problem caused by maximization and thus
decrease the overestimation errors.

The objective of DRL is to maximize the cumulative reward,
which is consistent with MDP, so DRL is suitable for solving
complex and dynamic route planning problems in real traffic
networks. In the discrete action space, the most used DRL
algorithm is Deep Q-Network (DQN), which combines value
function approximation with deep neural network (DNN) to
learn the optimization goal. The DQN algorithm replaces the
action-value evaluation table with a policy network:

For vehicle agents, limited on-board resources will reduce
the performance of DRL-based route planning methods, there
are two problems: (1) In the actual route planning, the vehicle
can receive multi-dimensional observations from the
environment, but not all of these information contribute to the
route decision-making. Under the limited on-board computing
resources, the policy network not only needs to filter out useful
information for route planning, but also needs to satisfy the
demand of real-time response. (2) The neural network's output
dimension is always fixed, but in the real traffic network, the
optional action space of vehicle agents is dynamic at each
junction, and some of the current studies fix the output
dimension as four: forward, turn left, turn right and return, that
is very inflexible. In addition, we only need to use the state
features vector with the largest 𝑄-value when training the policy
network, and the other useless state information will occupy a
large portion of space in the vehicle's limited storage resources.

(5)

𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) ≈ 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃𝜋 ).

When the vehicle needs to choose an action, it inputs all the
traffic information into the neural network to obtain the stateaction value (𝑄-value) for different actions. Such information
can be observed in the current state 𝑠. Then the vehicle can
choose the next action s' with the highest 𝑄-value. During the
driving process, the vehicle interacts with the environment
continuously, receiving rewards 𝑟 for different actions, and all
[𝑠, 𝑟, 𝑎, 𝑠′] are stored in the on-board storage resources for
training the policy model:
𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) ← 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) + 𝛼 ⋅ [𝑟 + 𝛾 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝜋 𝑄(𝑠 ′ , 𝑎) − 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎)]. (6)

So, to address the above-mentioned problems, we will
elaborate our optimization methods in the next section.

The stream diagram of Nature-DQN (N-DQN) algorithm
and Double-DQN (DDQN) is shown in Figure 2, the green
stream is the environment interaction and experience storage
part, the blue stream is the network training and update part, The
difference between DDQN and N-DQN is that DDQN also
needs to put 𝑠′ into the EvalNet to get the maximum 𝑄-values'
action 𝑎, and then use 𝑎 to select the 𝑄-value obtained from
TargetNet, that is,
𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡

𝑦𝑡𝑁−𝐷𝑄𝑁 = 𝑅𝑡+1 + 𝛾 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎 𝑄𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎; 𝜃𝑡
𝑦𝑡𝐷𝐷𝑄𝑁 = 𝑅𝑡+1 + 𝛾𝑄𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 (𝑠𝑡+1 ,

III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
The interaction process of proposed planning algorithm
model based on DRL is shown in Figure 5. There are five
elements that need to be designed carefully: the representation
vector of environment information S, reward R, the action A, the
agent π, and the training method. Each of them will be described
in detail as follows:

(7)

)

𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡

𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎 𝑄𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙 (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎; 𝜃𝑡𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙 ); 𝜃𝑡

(1) STATE: It is assumed that the vehicle agent can not only
obtain environment information from the static map in the
planning process, but also through on-board sensors fusion
technology and Vehicle to Network technology (V2N).
Therefore, we choose the following multi-dimensional state
features as real-time environmental representations in our
method:

)

(8)
which is shown in yellow stream.

[𝑃𝑣 , 𝑃𝑑 , 𝑃𝑎 , 𝑁𝑙 , 𝐿, 𝐷, 𝑁𝑣 , 𝑉𝑎 , 𝑉𝑚 , 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡 , 𝑇𝑙 , . . . ],

(9)

where 𝑃𝑣 denotes the position of the vehicle, 𝑃𝑑 denotes the
position of the destination, 𝑃𝑎 denotes the position of the action
end-point, 𝑁𝑙 denotes the lanes number, 𝐿 denotes the action
length, 𝐷 denotes the distance from the end of action to the
destination, 𝑁𝑣 denotes the number of vehicles on the road, 𝑉𝑎
denotes the average speed of all vehicles, 𝑉𝑚 denotes the road's
maximum speed limit, 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡 denotes the number of outgoings
and 𝑇𝑙 denotes the traffic lights at the junction. Except that, other
information such as the vehicle's posture, pedestrian information,
weather conditions, and accidents are not listed.
Figure 2. Nature-DQN and DDQN flow diagram.

The N-DQN algorithm tends to overestimate during training,
which due to two reasons: bootstrap and maximization.
Bootstrap can use the target network to alleviate the bias caused
163

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

calculated using three vectors < 𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦, 𝐾𝑒𝑦, 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 >. where
𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 (𝑄) and 𝐾𝑒𝑦 (𝐾) are feature vectors used for computing
the attention weights, 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 (𝑉) is the source information. In
the Attention mechanism, the attention score is obtained by
calculating the similarity between 𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 and 𝐾𝑒𝑦 , and the
attention result can be obtained by weighted sum of attention
scores and 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒:
𝐿

𝑥
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑛(𝑄, 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒) = ∑𝑖=1
𝑆 𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝑄, 𝐾𝑖 ) ∗ 𝑉𝑖 .

(12)

Figure 3. Reward mechanism.

(2) REWARD: The appropriate reward mechanism can
motivate the vehicle to choose the route that maximize the total
return and avoid taking undesirable actions, and rewards directly
affect the learning of the agent.
The optimization goal of route planning algorithm is to
minimize the vehicle's total travel time, so our reward
mechanism is designed as the estimated remaining time for the
vehicle to reach the action's end point, which is shown in Figure
3,
−(𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 /𝑉)
on the way
𝑅𝑠 = {
,
(10)
0
reach the end
where 𝑉 is the current vehicle speed, 𝑉 = 1 if average speed is
0. The negative sign indicates that the travel time of the vehicle
is inversely related to the reward.

Figure 5. Our improved DDQN flow diagram.

(3) ACTION: In the planning problem, the action of the
vehicle agent is to choose the next path at each junction. The
action space in actual road networks for each junction is dynamic
(Figure 4), and the vehicle agent can choose up to four actions:
[move forward, turn left, turn right, return].

(11)

Figure 4. Dynamic action space in each vehicle.

Figure 6. Attention Mechanism framework.

(4) AGENT: We use the value function approximation
method to obtain the optimal policy for the planning problem.
So the design of the policy neural network for the vehicle agent
is crucial. From the previous chapter, we know that the policy
network has to filter the key information useful from the multidimensional feature information obtained from the environment,
and these useful information have different contribution to the
objective function, so unlike the commonly used fully connected
neural networks, our approach uses the attention mechanism to
design our policy neural network.

So the essence of the Attention Mechanism is the same as
that of equation (3.5). Using the Attention Mechanism in the
policy network can help the vehicle agent to filter the
information from the multi-dimensional feature information
efficiently, and give different weights to different information.
With the limited on-board computing resources of the vehicle,
the attention can improve the decision-making ability and
efficiency of the policy network, make it better adapted to
different complex environments and tasks.
The Scaled dot-product Attention model is used to design our
policy network. 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 and 𝐾𝑒𝑦 are usually the same, and our
optimization objective is to minimize total travel time, so when
calculating the similarity weight, we set the 𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 to be the
estimated time of the action the agent takes plus the remaining
arrival time after taking the action:

The Attention Mechanism was first proposed in the field of
NLP [12], which is similar to the human's selective visual
attention mechanism, its core objective is to select the
information that is more critical to the current task from a large
amount of information. The framework of the Attention
Mechanism is shown in Figure 6, where the results are mainly
164

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

𝑄𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 = −[𝑇𝑎 + (𝐷𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 /𝑉)].

map with random traffic flows to simulate realistic traffic
conditions, which is shown in Figure 8. The simulation map is
generated by osmWebWizard.py and the random traffic flow is
generated by randomTrips.py, both of which are in the SUMO
tools.

(13)

(5) TRAINING: Since the dimension of a neural network is
fixed, DRL based route planning algorithm commonly fix the
output dimension to 4, which is the maximum number of actions
that a vehicle agent can take. In this case, the state information
fed by the environment will be a list consisting of the features
with all actions (Figure 7.(a)):

The training hyper-parameters of proposed algorithm are
shown in Table 1. The Scaled dot-product Attention is designed
as our policy network framework. To demonstrate the impact of
different environment information on the policy results, we
select 10 features as state representations, and design a
benchmark method which used a fully connected neural network
as the policy network to demonstrate the performance of the
proposed method.

1
𝑆 = [𝑃𝑣 , 𝑃𝑑 , 𝑃𝑎1 , 𝑁𝑙1 , 𝐿1 , 𝐷1 , 𝑁𝑣1 , 𝑉𝑎1 , 𝑉𝑚1 , 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡
, 𝑇𝑙1 , . . .
2 2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
𝑃𝑎 , 𝑁𝑙 , 𝐿 , 𝐷 , 𝑁𝑣 , 𝑉𝑎 , 𝑉𝑚 , 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡 , 𝑇𝑙 , . . .
3
𝑃𝑎3 , 𝑁𝑙3 , 𝐿3 , 𝐷3 , 𝑁𝑣3 , 𝑉𝑎3 , 𝑉𝑚3 , 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡
, 𝑇𝑙3 , . . .
4 4
4
4
4
4
4
4
𝑃𝑎 , 𝑁𝑙 , 𝐿 , 𝐷 , 𝑁𝑣 , 𝑉𝑎 , 𝑉𝑚 , 𝑁𝑜𝑢𝑡 , 𝑇𝑙4 , . . . ].
(14)

Figure 7. 𝑄-value getting methods.
Figure 8. Simulation city map.

When the junction has less than four outgoings, some
defaults also need to be set for non-exist actions, and we cannot
evaluate how the setting of these defaults affects the policy
network. In addition, to avoid the impact of high-dimensional
state information and defaults on agent's decision making and
storage, we use 𝑆 + 𝐴 as input information into the policy
network and get the 𝑄-value to each action separately (Figure
7.(b)), which makes our policy network more flexible. Futher
more, we use the idea of DDQN to alleviate the overestimation
problem caused by maximization, which not only reduces the
overestimation errors, but also saves empirical storage space and
avoids storing unnecessary information. Our algorithm for
training vehicle agent is shown as Figure 5. The yellow stream
shows that when the environment feedback the next state
1
2
information, we first put St+1 = [st+1
, st+2
, … ] into the policy
𝑗
network to obtain 𝑠𝑡+1 that maximizes 𝑞𝑒 , and then store it in the
memory library. During training, a batch of St+1 are randomly
selected and fed into the target network to obtain 𝑞𝑡 , and the loss
is calculated with 𝑞𝑒 to update the policy network. In the next
section, we conduct extensive simulations to verify the
feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed method.

Table 1 Hyper-parameters for Training
Parameter

Value

Episodes

8000

Adam optimizer learning rate

0.001

Exploration rate

0.9→0.01

Replay memory size

3000

Target network update frequency

5

Discount factor

0.99

Mini-batch for update

8

B. Results and Analysis
Figure 9 shows the model training convergence curves of the
proposed optimization method and the benchmark methods in
the simulation map, where the environment state features are
normalized in the benchmark methods. In the early training
stages, the average travel time of our method is less than the
benchmark methods, and in the late training stages, our method
converges faster compared to the FNN method with the same
number of neurons, which is credited to the design of the
Attention Mechanism in the policy network that allows the
vehicle agent to focus on the valid information faster. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method with limited
computing resources.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Simulations Setup
We design comparative experiments on SUMO to verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method. SUMO [13] is an open
source traffic simulation suite, which allows modeling of
intermodal traffic systems. Our optimization objective is to
reduce the vehicle point-to-point travel time as much as possible
with limited on-board computing and storage resources in the
complex traffic network, so in our experiment, we use a real city
165

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table II The Average Travel Time of Different Planning Algorithms
Method

FNN-32

FNN-100

Ours-32

𝑇𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛

151.3

136.2

138.6

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a computing resource optimization
scheme to reduce model complexity by using attention
mechanism in policy network design and a storage resource
optimization scheme by using improved DDQN during the
vehicle agent training process. Simulation results demonstrate
that the proposed method enables the model to effectively
discard useless environment state information and focus on
information that is useful for the optimization goal. In
conclusion, our research enhances the application and
deployment of DRL-based route planning solutions in realworld on-board navigation systems.
Figure 9. Model training curves

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) with grant no. 61901534 and
62271514, in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation under Key Project 2019B1515120032, in
part by the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of
Shenzhen
Municipality
with
grant
no.
JCYJ20210324120002007, JCYJ20190807155617099, and
ZDSYS20210623091807023.

We sum up the attention scores for each feature separately,
and take the logarithm to obtain Figure 10, which visualizes the
contribution of different environment features to the planning
task. It can be found that for the route planning problem, the
vehicle agent will pay more attention to whether there is a traffic
light at the junction, the number of vehicles on the path, the
remaining distance to the destination and the location
information when making decisions and does not pay much
attention to the speed information and outgoing information of
the path, which is similar to the human attention mechanism.
Therefore, with the limited computing resources, the planning
algorithm can use the attention mechanism to discard some
information with small contribution exchanging for the real-time
response requirement.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
Figure 10. Sum attention score of each state feature.

Table II shows the average travel time of proposed method
and benchmark methods (average travel time of 5000 − 8000
episodes). Compared to the FNN with 100 Neurous per layer,
our optimization method can reduce the number of neural
network parameters by about 68% for similar travel times,
making it more suitable for use in route planning navigation
systems with limited on-board resources.

[7]

[8]

[9]

D González, J Pérez, V Milanés, et al. A Review of Motion Planning
Techniques for Automated Vehicles[J]. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2016, 17(4):1135-1145
J. Liu, X. Mao, Y. Fang, D. Zhu and M. Q. . -H. Meng, "A Survey on
Deep-Learning Approaches for Vehicle Trajectory Prediction in
Autonomous Driving," 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Biomimetics (ROBIO), Sanya, China, 2021, pp. 978-985
K. Muhammad, A. Ullah, J. Lloret, J. D. Ser and V. H. C. de Albuquerque,
"Deep Learning for Safe Autonomous Driving: Current Challenges and
Future Directions," in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4316-4336, July 2021
A. Prakash, K. Chitta and A. Geiger, "Multi-Modal Fusion Transformer
for End-to-End Autonomous Driving," 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA,
2021, pp. 7073-7083
K. Chitta, A. Prakash, B. Jaeger, Z. Yu, K. Renz and A. Geiger,
"TransFuser: Imitation with Transformer-Based Sensor Fusion for
Autonomous Driving," in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2022
K. Chitta, A. Prakash and A. Geiger, "NEAT: Neural Attention Fields for
End-to-End Autonomous Driving," 2021 IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2021,
pp. 15773-15783
L. L. Li et al., "End-to-end Contextual Perception and Prediction with
Interaction Transformer," 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2020, pp.
5784-5791
Avik Santra; Souvik Hazra; Lorenzo Servadei; Thomas Stadelmayer;
Michael Stephan; Anand Dubey, "Deep Reinforcement Learning," in
Methods and Techniques in Deep Learning: Advancements in mmWave
Radar Solutions , IEEE, 2023
B. R. Kiran et al., "Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous
Driving: A Survey," in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 4909-4926, June 2022

166

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[10] P. Chen, J. Pei, W. Lu, and M. Li, “A deep reinforcement learning based
method for real-time path planning and dynamic obstacle avoidance,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 497, pp. 64–75, 2022.
[11] S. Koh, B. Zhou, H. Fang, P. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Yang, L. Guan, and Z.
Ji, “Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle navigation,”
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 96, p. 106694, 2020.

[12] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017
[13] P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, and E. Wiener,
“Microscopic traffic simulation using sumo,” in The 21st IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2018

167

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

