2024 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC)
October 6-10, 2024. Sarawak, Malaysia

A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach for Route Planning of
Autonomous Vehicles*

2024 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) | 978-1-6654-1020-5/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/SMC54092.2024.10831232

Francesco Paparella, Giuseppe Olivieri, Gaetano Volpe,
Agostino Marcello Mangini, Senior Member, IEEE, Maria Pia Fanti, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Urban autonomous driving has the potential to
enhance both safety and efficiency of transportation in environments also in complex traffic conditions. However, new services
and approaches are necessary to manage Autonomous Vehicles
in the real traffic. This paper introduces a novel approach to
optimize routing in the urban settings by Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) techniques. A modular DRL architecture is
proposed to obtain a route able to minimize the length of the
paths, minimize the number of turns during the travel and
select the dedicated lanes. The proposed DRL is implemented
on a case study where the agents are trained in a simulation
environment for the city center of Bari, a town of Southern
Italy.

I. INTRODUCTION
With the evolution of the urban autonomous driving, the
choice of personalized and optimal routes is emerging as
a crucial element in the context of roadway planning. The
customized routes is based on the dynamic adaptation of
pathways in response to urban context variables, such as
traffic and user preferences. Optimizing routes and travel
times is a way to reduce congestion, decrease gas emissions
and contribute to global efforts to mitigate climate change
[1], [2].
In the recent years, the research and innovation areas
focus on Cooperative, Connected and Automated Mobility
topics and services for managing and controlling autonomous
driving systems. In particular, the related literature is large
so that only the most relevant studies are cited here. For
instance, some novel contributions enlighten that the most
modern technologies based on Information and communications technologies, such as Connected and Cooperative Services, Artificial Intelligence and Big Data allow to connect
users, vehicles and infrastructures in an intelligent, efficient,
safe and sustainable manner [3], [4], [5].
In the route planning, Ma et al. [6] propose a graph
convolutional network-based multi-objective meta-deep Qlearning method to efficiently learn a dynamically changing
This study is a part of the IN2CCAM project that has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 101076791 and a part of 6G-TWIN
project that has received funding from the Smart Networks and Services
Joint Undertaking (SNS JU) under the European Union Horizon Europe
research and innovation program under Grant Agreement No 101136314.
This manuscript reflects only the authors’ views and opinions, neither
the European Union nor the European Commission can be considered
responsible for them.
F. Paparella, G. Olivieri, G. Volpe, A. M. Mangini and M. P. Fanti are
with the Department of Electrical and Information Engineering,Polytechnic
University of Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy (f.paparella7@phd.poliba.it;
g.olivieri@phd.poliba.it;
gaetano.volpe@poliba.it;
agostinomarcello.mangini@poliba.it; mariapia.fanti@poliba.it).

978-1-6654-1020-5/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

signalized traffic network and automatically explore ecoroutes based on drivers’ preferences for travel time and fuel
consumption.
Sharma et al. [7] propose a Graph Neural Network based
approach for real-time estimation of traffic speed in sustainable smart cities, which has important implications for
route planning applications. The authors develop a novel
Spatio-Temporal Gated Graph Attention Network model that
captures both spatial dependencies and temporal dynamics
within the road network graph structure.
Efficiently matching trip requests and available drivers
are central operational problems, as pointed out by Qin
et al. [8]. The authors propose a Reinforcement Learning
(RL) based approach to tackle the challenge of finding
an optimal delayed matching policy in a complex ridehailing environment, where the efficiency of matching can be
substantially improved by adaptively adjusting the matching
time interval.
In a comprehensive systematic literature review, Teusch
et al. [9] provide an in-depth exploration of the diverse
applications of Machine Learning (ML) techniques in Shared
Mobility Systems (SMS), offering invaluable insights for service providers seeking to optimize their decision-making processes and enhance daily operations. The review highlights
the transformative potential of ML as a powerful methodological solution to tackle specific management challenges
that are pivotal for the efficient and effective functioning of
SMS.
Amarnath et al. [10] propose a novel ML-based approach
to enhance transportation services through route-based user
segmentation and clustering. The method harnesses real-time
location data and users’ route preferences to dynamically
group travelers sharing common routes, facilitating efficient
communication and information sharing during transit.
Moreover, some works are oriented to optimize only
specific features of a scenario or finding the shortest path.
For instance, paper [11] proposes a generic bi-criteria optimum path-finding framework based on deep reinforcement
learning (DRL). Simulations are performed to verify the
effectiveness of the proposed approach, where two criteria
(i.e., solar radiation and crime risk) are modeled based on
the real-world data in downtown New York.
Indeed, DRL is a promising solution especially in the
domains of driving policy, predictive perception, path and
motion planning, and low level controller design. Reinforcement learning is still an active and emerging area in realworld autonomous driving applications. Although there are

2047

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a few successful commercial applications, there is very little
literature or large-scale public datasets available. Open issues
will include: validating the performance of RL based systems, the simulation-reality gap, sample efficiency, designing
good reward functions, incorporating safety into decision
making RL systems for autonomous agents.
The development of explicitly multi-agent DRL approaches to the autonomous driving problem is an important
future challenge that has not received a lot of attention [12].
Some papers use DRL to train a driving agent by using Light
Detection and Ranging (Lidar), and a camera sensor. For
example, [13] uses Lidar for path tracking and a combination
of Lidar and a camera sensor for obstacle avoidance. On
the contrary, a recent paper [14] proposes an adaptive path
planning approach of Autonomous Vehicle (AV) established
multi-light trained RL, aimed to enhance the fuel cost as
well as AV comfort. However, a path planning that seeks to
limit safety problems for an AV during its journey, such as
avoiding left/right turns or using priority lanes, has not been
proposed.
This paper aims to address these gaps and considers the
basic problem of designing suitable routes in the cities for
AVs by focusing on multi objectives that are the length of
the routes, the requirements of minimizing the turns during
the travel and the selection of dedicated lanes. The problem
is solved by applying a modular DRL model based on the
training of agents associated with the AVs. Since, considering
all the possible routes of the cities for completing the training
is a very time consuming and complex task, we address such
issue by proposing a modular DRL architecture based on the
division of the city in a set of zones. A set of agents is trained
and each agent is associated to routes starting from a zone
and ending to a different one. The AV will select the route
that exhibits the best multi-objective strategy enlightened by
the best value of the reward. The modular approach allows
us to train the agents in parallel and in limited urban areas.
The proposed modular DRL based strategy is applied to
the city center of Bari, a town of Southern Italy and the
agents are trained in a simulation environment. Some results
show the advantages of the proposed methodology. Naturally,
if the city of study changes a new agent training is needed
to take in account different characteristic as traffic patterns
and road network.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the formulation of the problem and Section
III introduces the used deep reinforcement learning model.
Moreover, Section IV describes the case study and the
obtained results. Finally, Section VI draws conclusions and
future works.

The road network is modeled as a graph G(J, E) where
the set of nodes J = {j|j = 1, ..., n} is the set of junctions
or intersections and the set of edges E = {e1 , e2 , ...em }
denotes the set of the city streets. In particular, it holds that
an edge ei = (j, r) ∈ E if there exists a street starting
from j ∈ J and ending to r ∈ J. Moreover, we consider
a set of edges Ep ⊂ E that are priority edges, i.e., they
correspond to streets dedicated to the AVs. We consider the
problem of determining the route that connects a pair of
edges c = (es , ef ) where es is the starting edge and ef is
the ending edge. A possible route connecting the pair c =
(es , ef ) is a path p represented by a sequence of edges p =
(es , ....ej , .., ef ). The problem to be solved for a given pair
c = (es , ef ), is determining the optimum path exhibiting
the minimum path length, the minimum number of right/left
turns crossed and the maximum number of priority traveled
routes.
III. D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING M ODEL
The Markov decision processes (MDPs) are considered
the standard when formalising sequential decision making
problems involving a single RL agent. A MDP is defined as
a five-tuple
< S, A, T, R, γ >
where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions which
could change the status, T is the transition function, which is
the probability of the state change under the certain action, R
is the reward function, and γ is known as the discount factor,
which models the importance of the future and immediate
rewards.
We model the route planner problem as a MDP, where the
agents follow a policy π (a|s) in a predetermined environment. More specifically, at each time step t, given the current
state s(t) ∈ S, each agent chooses an action a(t) ∈ A,
according to the current policy, transits to the next state
s(t + 1) and finally receives a reward r(t) ∈ R. The agent
purpose is to maximize the expectation of the return over
time that is called thePdiscounted cumulative reward and is
∞
defined as G(s(t)) = h=0 γ h r(t + h + 1), where γ ∈ [0, 1]
is the discount factor.
For a given couple of source and destination edges c =
(es , ef ) , in the proposed system an RL agent is associated
with the AV that chooses the best action to obtain the
minimum distance, with the minimum number of right/left
turns and the maximum number of priority edges.
A. State Space and Action Space
The state of the agent s(t) ∈ S at time t is the following:
s(t) = [x(t), ϕv (t), e( t)]

II. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Let us consider an AV that has to travel in the city: the
problem is to find the optimal path p starting from a generic
point of the city to a final point with the aim of minimizing
the length of the route, minimizing the number of right and
left turns and using the lanes dedicated to the AVs.

where x(t) = (Lat(t), Lon(t)) denotes the latitude Lat(t)
and the longitude Lon(t) of the position of the AV at time
t respectively, ϕv (t) represents the heading angle of the AV
(i.e., the angle of the AV, going clockwise with 0 at the 12’o
clock position) and e(t) ∈ E is the edge occupied by the AV
at time t.

2048
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

When an AV arrives to a node j ∈ J at time t, it can
change the edge and can decide among three possible actions:
A = {Gostraight, T urnright, T urnlef t}.
B. Multi-objective Reward function
We define a Multi-objective Reward function composed
by a reward for shortest path, by left and right turns and
finally a reward to use a priority path for the AV.
1) Shortest path: To describe a reward that show how
the agent moves towards the destination edge, we define the
distance d(t) between the current edge at time t, and the
destination edge ef . In case of the current distance d(t) is
less than the distance d(t−1) at time t−1, then it means that
the AV moves towards destination, instead if d(t) is higher
that the distance d(t − 1), then the agent moves far. The
reward function is defined as follows:
(
1
if d(t) < d(t − 1)
(1)
rshortest (t) =
−0.5 otherwise.

Fig. 1: DRL training considering all possible pairs of (es , ef )

2) Avoiding left/right turns: If the modulus of the difference between the angle at time t ϕ(t) and the angle ϕ(t + 1)
at time t + 1 is greater than a fixed angle ϕf ixed , then
we suppose that the AV turns. In such a case the agent is
penalized:
(
−1 if |ϕ(t) − ϕ(t − 1)| ≥ ϕf ixed
(2)
rT lT r (t) =
0
otherwise.
3) Priority lanes: For considering the priority lanes, it is
enough to define a positive reward if at the step t, the current
edge e(t) ∈ Ep :
(
1 if e(t) ∈ Ep
rpriority (t) =
(3)
0 otherwise.
4) Multi-objective reward: A multi-objective reward function rtot at each time t is formulated as follows:
rtot (t) = αrshortest + βrT lT r (t) + γrpriority (t)

(4)

where α, β and γ are the weights assigned to each reward
component.
C. The Modular DRL Architecture
The standard training of the DRL model should consider
all possible pairs of (es , ef ) so as to cover the considered
map. Such exhaustive approach is depicted in Fig. 1. However, when the cardinality of set E is high, i.e. , when it is
necessary to deal with big maps with thousand of edges, this
approach becomes infeasible due to the very long training
times and high variance of the resulting neural network.
In this paper, we propose a modular architecture approach
in which the set E is partitioned in N subsets such that E =
E1 ∪ E2 ∪ ...EN and Ei ∩ Ej = ∅ ∀i, j = 1, 2, . . . , N and
i ̸= j. Then, as Fig. 2 shows, we train N agents in a parallel
fashion, each with a randomly selected pair ci = (es , ef ),
where es ∈ Ei and ef ∈ Ej ∀i, j = 1, . . . , N .

Fig. 2: Modular DRL training

At the end of the training, we obtain N agents that can
be used at runtime to calculate N suboptimal paths for a
specific pair of ci = (es , ef ) requested by an AV. Each agent
determines a suboptimal path pki that is associated with a
reward rk , with k = 1, ..., N . At this point the proposed
strategy chooses the path pmax
to which is associated the
i
highest reward rimax . Hence, the obtained optimal solution
the path pmax
is returned to the AV. The modular DRLi
based route planner scheme is depicted in Fig. 3. Note that
the agents do not communicate with each other since it is
the system manger that select the best route.
In contrast to the exhaustive approach, the advantage of the
proposed modular strategy is that the main problem is split
in N smaller sub-problems that cover all different zones of
the map and can be trained in parallel to reduce complexity
of the resulting neural networks and reducing training time.
The number N of the considered subsets should be chosen
according to the size of the map.
IV. C ASE S TUDY
In this section, we implement the proposed modular DRLbased strategy to calculate optimal routes for AVs operating
in the city center of Bari (Italy).
A. SUMO Simulation Environment
We consider a map of the city centre of Bari extracted from
OpenStreetMap. We import the map in SUMO [15] Simulator
obtaining a graph network of 3426 edges. Each edge comes

2049
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3: Modular DRL-based route planner.

Fig. 4: Map of city centre of Bari, Italy.

with several spatial information such as road segment type,
allowed maximum speed limits, the number of lanes and the
number of traffic signs. The map is depicted in Fig. 4.
The edge set E of the graph modeling the city center is
partitioned in N = 4 subsets Ei with i = 1, ..., 4.. We use
a standard passenger car to emulate an AV and we place
random traffic on the map to make the simulation more
realistic.
The modular DRL training is implemented in Python
language using the RLLib [16] libraries. The Python script
is continuously connected to the SUMO environment by the
TraCi interface. After the training, we use a REST-Api that
exposes the trained agents and allows the AV to dispatch a
route planning request.
We run all the simulations by a personal computer
equipped with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8565U CPU and 32 GB
of RAM.
B. Modular DRL Training Results
A PPO-Clip DRL algorithm provided by RLLib is used
to train the agents. In particular, the discount factor is set to

0.99, the clip parameter to 0.2 and learning rate to 2.5e-4.
Four random pairs of source and destination edges are
selected from subsets E1 ,E2 ,E3 and E4 . For each pair, pi =
(es , ef ) the points es and ef are chosen so that the Euclidean
distance between the two edges is at least 500 meters.
After each simulation step t, the AV chooses and executes
one of the available actions. Then, we use the TraCi interface
to collect the current position x(t) of the AV on the map, the
heading angle ϕv (t) and the current edge e(t). The collected
values are used to calculate the reward rtot (t). In this work,
we set the weights α = β = γ = 1.
Each episode terminates when the AV arrives at its destination or if an error occurs in the simulation environment.
The results of the training are depicted in Fig. 5. In detail,
Fig. 5a-5d show the mean reward of each episode for the
four agents. We observe that all the agents converge to a
mean value of 0 in almost 400k episodes after three hours
of training.
We perform the same training using the exhaustive approach described in Section III-C to compare the results.

2050
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Agent 1

(b) Agent 2

(a) Agent 1 (Reward = -9)

(c) Agent 3

(d) Agent 4

Fig. 5: DRL episode mean reward with modular strategy.

In contrast to the proposed method, in this case we use
only a single agent and we choose a random pair of edges
c = (es , ef ) for each training episode. As Fig. 6 shows, the
exhaustive approach converges to a value of -5 after 400k
episodes and seven hour of training.

(b) Agent 2 (Reward = -49)

(c) Agent 3 (Reward = -6)

Fig. 6: DRL episode mean reward with exhaustive approach.
Since the mean reward obtained by the four agents is
greater than the one obtained by the exhaustive approach, it
is evident that the modular DRL strategy is better in terms of
performances. Moreover, due to the less complexity of the
sub-problems compared to the main problem, the training
time is also much less than the traditional approach.
(d) Agent 4 (Reward = -12)

C. Modular DRL Route Planner Example
In this subsection, we show an example of a route planning
request dispatched by an AV and processed by the agents
trained in Section IV-B and the architecture described in Fig.
3.
More in detail, the AV chooses two edges es and ef as
origin and destination edge to form the pair c = (es , ef ) and
sends the request by the REST-Api interface to agents 1, 2,
3 and 4 and collects the paths and the associated rewards.
In Fig. 7, the paths returned by the agents are shown.
We observe that each agent determined a different path for
the trip from es to ef . The four returned paths p1 , p2 , p3 , p4

Fig. 7: Paths and rewards returned by the Modular DRL
Route Planner.

received the following rewards: of r1 = −9, r2 = −49,r3 =
−6 and r4 = −12.
The path calculated by Agent 1 is shown in Fig. 7a and is
the shortest path. However, it does not pass by the priority
edges that are marked in red in Fig. 4 and does not contribute
to the third component of the multi-objective reward defined
in Section III-B. On the contrary, Fig. 7b shows that the

2051
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

path calculated by Agent 2 passes by the priority edges but
it is too long and exhibits many turns. Moreover, the path
returned by Agent 4 is similar to the one of Agent 1.
Finally, the path calculated by Agent 3 passes by the
priority edge, includes only one turn and has a total length
slightly higher than the one calculated by Agent 1. Moreover,
it passes by the priority edges defined on the map and
contributes to all the components of the multi-objective
proposed reward. As expected, this path received the highest
reward (-6) and is selected as the optimal path by the AV.
V. C ONCLUSION
The approach used in this paper highlights the effectiveness of the modular Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
approach in urban routing optimization. By integrating modular DRL algorithms, we are able to dynamically adapt to
changing urban traffic conditions and user preferences.
Training the model on data extracted from the open-source
platform OpenStreetMap, using diverse urban scenarios diversified with the SUMO simulator, allowed us to optimize
routes considering factors such as user preferences, costs,
and utility.
These findings support the idea that combining artificial
intelligence with urban planning can lead to smarter and
more responsive transportation systems in the smart cities
of the future.
The future research will integrate the proposed modular
DRL approach with other technologies such as vehicle-toeverything (V2X) communication in order to enable more
efficient and safer coordination of urban traffic. Moreover,
the weights assigned to each reward component and the the
rules for the map division will be optimized.

[9] J. Teusch, J. N. Gremmel, C. Koetsier, F. T. Johora, M. Sester, D. M.
Woisetschläger, and J. P. Müller, “A systematic literature review on
machine learning in shared mobility,” IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 4, pp. 870–899, 2023.
[10] J. Amarnath J, R. S, and K. K. S, “Route-based user segmentation and
clustering: A machine learning approach for enhanced transportation
service,” in 2023 Intelligent Computing and Control for Engineering
and Business Systems (ICCEBS), pp. 1–4, Dec 2023.
[11] C. Chen, L. Li, M. Li, R. Li, Z. Wang, F. Wu, and C. Xiang,
“curl: A generic framework for bi-criteria optimum path-finding based
on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1949–1961, 2023.
[12] B. R. Kiran, I. Sobh, V. Talpaert, P. Mannion, A. A. A. Sallab, S. Yogamani, and P. Pérez, “Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous
driving: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 23, pp. 4909–4926, June 2022.
[13] F. Shafique, T. Naeem, and A. H. Farooqi, “Path tracking and obstacle
avoidance control using deep reinforcement learning for autonomous
vehicles,” in 2023 17th International Conference on Open Source
Systems and Technologies (ICOSST), pp. 1–6, 2023.
[14] B. Durgabhavani, V. B. Reddy Muvva, L. Leo Joseph, D. M. Babu, and
M. H. T., “Adaptive path planning for autonomous vehicles in complex
traffic scenarios,” in 2023 International Conference on Evolutionary
Algorithms and Soft Computing Techniques (EASCT), pp. 1–5, 2023.
[15] A. Kusari, P. Li, H. Yang, N. Punshi, M. Rasulis, S. Bogard, and D. J.
LeBlanc, “Enhancing sumo simulator for simulation based testing and
validation of autonomous vehicles,” in 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV), pp. 829–835, 2022.
[16] E. Liang, R. Liaw, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, R. Fox, K. Goldberg,
J. Gonzalez, M. Jordan, and I. Stoica, “RLlib: Abstractions for
distributed reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (J. Dy and A. Krause, eds.),
vol. 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3053–3062,
PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.

R EFERENCES
[1] L. Liang, H. Ye, and G. Y. Li, “Toward intelligent vehicular networks:
A machine learning framework,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, pp. 124–135, Feb 2019.
[2] A. Pompigna and R. Mauro, “Smart roads: A state of the art of
highways innovations in the smart age,” Engineering Science and
Technology, an International Journal, vol. 25, p. 100986, 2022.
[3] M. P. Fanti, A. Rinaldi, M. Roccotelli, B. Silvestri, S. Porru, and F. E.
Pani, “Software requirements and use cases for electric light vehicles
management,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 311–316, 2018.
[4] M. P. Fanti, A. M. Mangini, M. Roccotelli, B. Silvestri, and S. Digiesi,
“Electric vehicle fleet relocation management for sharing systems
based on incentive mechanism,” in 2019 IEEE 15th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), pp. 1048–
1053, 2019.
[5] A. M. Mangini and M. Roccotelli, “Innovative services for electric
mobility based on virtual sensors and petri nets,” IEEE/CAA Journal
of Automatica Sinica, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1845–1859, 2023.
[6] X. Ma, Y. Xie, and C. Chigan, “Graph convolutional network based
multi-objective meta-deep q-learning for eco-routing,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–16, 2024.
[7] A. Sharma, A. Sharma, P. Nikashina, V. Gavrilenko, A. Tselykh,
A. Bozhenyuk, M. Masud, and H. Meshref, “A graph neural network
(gnn)-based approach for real-time estimation of traffic speed in
sustainable smart cities,” Sustainability, vol. 15, no. 15, 2023.
[8] G. Qin, Q. Luo, Y. Yin, J. Sun, and J. Ye, “Optimizing matching
time intervals for ride-hailing services using reinforcement learning,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 129,
p. 103239, 2021.

2052
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:33:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

