2020 IEEE 17th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS) | 978-1-7281-9866-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MASS50613.2020.00023

*&&&UI*OUFSOBUJPOBM$POGFSFODFPO.PCJMF"E)PDBOE4FOTPS4ZTUFNT ."44

A Data-Driven Reinforcement Learning Based
Multi-Objective Route Recommendation System
Ankur Sarker∗ , Haiying Shen∗ and Kamran Kowsari†
∗ Department

of Computer Science
of Systems and Information Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, USA
{as4mz, hs6ms, kk7nc}@virginia.edu

† Department

map routing system not only offers smart, personalized routing
based on users’ ethnicity [7] but also provides a safer route
by reducing accident-prone maneuvers [8].
Several multi-preference routing systems have been proposed [9]–[14], where different attributes (e.g., travel time,
fuel consumption, charging monetary cost, risks, and so on)
are considered equally without any consideration of user
preference. Therefore, these systems cannot take into account
the user preference in proving the route suggestions. These
works also do not provide well-balanced routes. Recommending well-balanced routes means no criterion is sacriﬁced
signiﬁcantly in order to give high priorities to other criteria
when trying to follow the preference weights given by a
user. For example, as indicated in [15], by following a user
preference of 5% travel time, 5% fuel consumption, and 90%
air quality, the existing systems [9]–[14] may suggest a route
taking a detour to seek fresh air but cost either higher travel
time or fuel consumption. However, a well-balanced route
should include the road segments with fresh air but also
lower travel time and fuel consumption [15]. An existing
work [15] proposes a multi-preference route recommendation
system where a user can input his/her preferred weights of
travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality while requesting
a balanced route from source to destination. However, this
multi-preference route recommendation system requires longer
time latency to suggest a route due to the usage of conventional
multi-objective optimization solutions. Therefore, there arises
a problem: for a given vehicle driving from a source to
a destination, how to choose a route in a timely manner
so that the vehicle can successfully arrive at its destination
considering the driver’s preferred weights on travel time, fuel
consumption, and air pollutants at the same time?
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-preference routing
system to combine different user-preferred routing criteria (i.e.,
travel time, fuel consumption, and pollution) to ﬁnd an optimal
source-destination route in a timely manner. First, we build
and periodically update a road network graph consists of road
segments and intersections with predicted travel times, fuel
consumption, and air qualities of all road segments. Second,
we design an optimal route recommendation system satisfying
a given user’s preference. We formulate the route recommendation problem as the multi-objective optimization problem
considering travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality of

Abstract—Driving route recommendation systems have been
becoming popular due to high demands on such systems and their
high socio-economic impacts. Existing route recommendation
systems cannot provide a well-balanced route by considering the
user preference on multiple criteria or make route recommendation in a short time. This paper presents a multi-objective route
recommendation system considering three different attributes
(i.e., fuel consumption, travel time, and air quality). The proposed
route recommendation system uses the Q-learning based reinforcement learning algorithm to leverage the available datasets
to make route recommendations in a timely manner. First, we
build a road network graph using a publicly available map
service (i.e., OpenStreetMap) and other real-world datasets on
trafﬁc, weather, and air substances. Second, we utilize the existing
predictors for air quality, travel time, and fuel consumption
estimations to update the road network graph periodically. Third,
we design the route recommendation system using the Q-learning
reinforcement learning approach considering the given user’s
preference for travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality.
To evaluate the proposed approach’s performance, we conduct
experimental evaluations based on the real-world datasets with
publicly available map service.
Index Terms—Vehicle routing; User preferred routing; Multipreference routing; Multi-criteria optimization;

I. I NTRODUCTION
Driving route recommendation systems have been becoming
popular due to high demands on such systems and their high
socio-economic impacts. Currently, different map services
already provide the source-destination vehicle routing service
that considers travel distance or travel time [1], [2]. The route
recommendation systems can consider different attributes. The
travel time is the most preferred criterion for commuters,
especially for time-critical tasks such as an ambulance. For
taxi drivers, fuel consumption is more critical and preferable
than other attributes. Some people may prefer the air quality
of the route over other attributes while driving from source
to destination [3], [4]. Indeed, uncontrolled emissions lead
to devastating consequences for public health, such as the
increased risk for cardiovascular diseases [5] and neurological
issues [6]. A user may be concerned about these health
issues and wish to both reduce creating pollution and their
exposure to the pollutants. As a result, it is desired to have a
route recommendation system that offers routes with multiple
criteria, in which a user can choose his/her preference while
driving from source to destination. For instance, the Waze

¥*&&&
%0*."44



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

different road segments. To solve this route recommendation
problem, we then propose a Reinforcement Learning (RL)
based routing solution considering user-preferred routing criteria. We use the Q-learning algorithm [16], which is one of the
RL algorithms. After the training, the Q-learning algorithm
is able to provide a solution in a timely manner compared
to other multi-objection solutions as used in the existing
approaches [9], [10], [13], [15], [17]. In our approach, the
Q-learning maintains a reward table and Q-value table for
each pair of nodes from the road network graph. The Qvalue Q(s, a) in Q-learning is an estimate of the value of
future rewards if the agent takes a particular action a given the
current state s. The current state s determines an intersection
or node vehicle traversing, and the action a deﬁnes a chosen
road segment or edge from all possible edges. The reward table
is determined by the user preference and different metrics of
the road segment or edge (i.e., travel time, fuel consumption,
and air quality). The proposed system builds a table of Qvalues for each environment state and each possible action
following a certain policy function by exploring the environment. Eventually, the proposed system selects the action with
the highest Q-value. After the training, the proposed system
picks all possible edges from a given source to a destination
node using the Q-value table. Third, we conduct extensive
experimental studies based on the real-world, geo-tagged data
sources (trafﬁc, weather, POIs, and GPS traces). From the
comparative studies with other existing approaches, we verify
that the proposed Q-learning based routing system suggests
a route satisfying user preferences on multiple criteria in a
timely manner.
The major contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
•

•

tion studies using real-world data sources. Finally, Section VI
concludes this paper with remarks on our future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
We classify the existing routing systems into four groups.
The ﬁrst group [18]–[25] handles a single objective routing
without using spatio-temporal trafﬁc analysis. The second
group [4], [20]–[22] handles a single objective routing with
the utilization of spatio-temporal trafﬁc analysis. The third
group [9]–[15] handles the multi-preference routing. The
fourth group [26]–[30] uses RL for the routing recommendation.
The works in [18]–[25] provide a single objective routing
recommendation from a source to a destination. Some of these
works [18], [19], [23] utilize the optimal velocity proﬁles to
avoid unnecessary braking of the vehicles and increase the
fuel efﬁciency while routing from a source to a destination.
Ganti et. al [18] utilized the historical fuel consumption of
different road segments in designing a fuel-efﬁcient routing
system. Shang et. al [23] utilized GPS traces of different
drivers at different road segments to accurately predict the
fuel consumption at these road segments given the time of day.
Ding et. al [19] considered different driving behaviors toward
the fuel consumption of different road segments given the time
of day. Pessoa et. al [31] presented a branching rule for the
branch-and-cut solver using the accumulated travel time or fuel
consumption of the vehicle and used the brunch-and-cut solver
to solve the single objective routing problem. Macrina et.
al [24] proposed an energy-efﬁcient path recommendation
system for a ﬂeet of (electric and conventional) vehicles,
which uses a metaheuristic neighbor node searching schedule
in the road network graph to ﬁnd the routes. Wang et. al [25]
proposed a mixed-integer programming model and developed
a branch-and-price algorithm to solve the vehicle routing
problem in the presence of trucks and drones.
Another set of works [4], [20]–[22] analyze different trafﬁc
characteristics (e.g., trafﬁc signal, road gradients, point-ofinterests (POIs)) and use the characteristics in solving the
single objective routing problem, where the objective is to
either decrease the travel time, fuel consumption, or air pollutant exposure in routing. The existing SignalGuru system [20]
utilizes the mobile ad-hoc network to predict the volume of
surrounding vehicles and the duration of the green phase of
the trafﬁc light. Finally, it calculates the desired speed proﬁle
to avoid complete stops in front of the trafﬁc lights and offers
fuel-efﬁcient routing. EcoDrive considers the road gradient of
speciﬁc intersections and utilizes the dynamic programming
approach to ﬁnd the optimized speed proﬁle to reduce fuel
consumption [21]. Kang et. al [22] calculated the optimized
speed proﬁle of a road section for the electric vehicles based
on the historical trafﬁc ﬂow and road gradients. Xu et. al [32]
studied the spatio-temporal trafﬁc analysis on a large road
network map to suggest routes to reduce travel time and fuel
consumption as well. Wang et. al [33] developed another realtime route recommendation system, R3, for the routing from

We propose a multi-preference routing system. It uses
the RL solution of multi-criteria optimization problem
based on three different cost functions to ﬁnd the optimal
balanced route (to minimize travel time and fuel consumption and maximize air quality) in a timely manner
given a user’s preferences on different criteria.
We conduct extensive experimental evaluations based
on the real geo-tagged data sources (trafﬁc, weather,
POIs, and GPS traces). The comparative studies on the
proposed routing system comparing with other existing
multi-preference systems verify the proposed routing system’s effectiveness in terms of air quality guarantee, fuel
consumption reduction, and travel time reduction with
the consideration of the user’s preferences in a timely
manner.

Note that though we consider three factors in routing in this
paper, other factors can be easily added to our consideration
factor list in the same manner. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the existing literature.
Section III presents the basic deﬁnitions and routing problem
of this paper. Then, Section IV presents the system design
of the proposed multi-preference route planner. Section V
evaluates the proposed route planner through extensive simula-



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a source to a destination based on an optimization solution
and the spatio-temporal trafﬁc patterns of the road network to
decrease the travel time. These works do not consider users’
preferences and lack the multiple perspectives in the routing.
In addition to the above works, Mahajan et. al [4] proposed
a data-driven clean-air route recommendation system that
utilizes the interpolation method (i.e., spatio-temporal ordinary
kriging method) to ﬁnd out the patterns of air participles in
different roads segments so that the road segments with lower
air pollutants are chosen to construct a route from the source
to the destination.
Recently, multi-preference vehicle routing systems have
been proposed [9]–[15]. The work in [14] uses the crowdsourcing platform to calculate the quantitative measures of
different location perceptions with respect to happiness, beauty, and noise of the routes and suggests the routing solution based on the adjacent locations preferable to users.
EcoSky [12] uses GPS traces to predict the travel time and
fuel consumption of different roads. It considers either timeefﬁcient, fuel-efﬁcient, or a combination of both factors in
choosing one route from multiple candidate routes based
on the user’s preferences and gives a higher priority to the
routes previously chosen by the user. Hendawi et. al [13]
proposed a route recommendation system with the goal of
minimizing travel time and fuel consumption, which uses an
optimization solution (i.e., dynamic A* algorithm) to ﬁnd
an optimal path from a source to a destination. Sarker et.
al [9] proposed a data-driven multi-objective route planner for
electric vehicles, which ﬁnds a route with low travel time,
energy consumption, charging cost, and range anxiety using
the adaptive epsilon constraint optimization method. Sarker et.
al [15] also proposed a data-driven multi-objective route planner considering air quality, travel time, and fuel consumption.
The authors utilized the given user preferences in the adaptive
epsilon constraint optimization solution to retrieve a wellbalanced route concerning all factors. Guo et. al [10] studied
a dynamic multi-objective vehicle routing problem for a ﬂeet
of vehicles with hard-time window constraints (i.e., a few to
thousand minutes). They employed a dynamic particle swarm
optimization solution that includes a two-phase global routing
procedure; the ﬁrst phase serves the current routing requests
and the second phase satisﬁes the randomly appeared routing
requests promptly. Qi et. al [11] proposed a multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm with time windows, which decomposes
a target problem with a novel selection operator into a set
of scalar sub-problems and optimizes them simultaneously.
However, these approaches do not observe users’ preferences
or consider different preferences together (e.g., travel time
and fuel consumption). The above works also fail to provide
an optimal route in near real-time due to the longer time
complexity of the optimization solutions.
There is another group of works [26]–[30] that use the RL
algorithms to guide a single-objective shortest path from the
source to the destination in different environments. Panov et.
al [26] proposed a Q-learning based shortest path searching
algorithm for an intelligent agent in a grid-based environment.

Similarly, Han et. al [34] introduced a Q-learning algorithm
based intelligent routing system for routing autonomous taxis.
Cao et. al [27] designed a Q-learning algorithm to route a
vehicle from the source to the destination, in which a dynamic
neural network is used so that the Q-value table represents
the actual probabilities of arriving on time at the destination
and improve routing efﬁciency. Konar et. al [28] proposed
a deterministic Q-learning based planning algorithm for a
mobile robot, in which the estimated distances between the
current state and both the next state and the goal are used
to update the Q-table and increase the time efﬁciency for the
path planning algorithm. Xia et. al [29] handled an online
shortest path problem for an intelligent robot using the Qlearning algorithm, where the traveling distance is considered
as a probabilistic variable to ﬁnd a probabilistic shortest path
from the source to the destination. Yu et. al [30] proposed
a probabilistic shortest path solution using the Q-learning
algorithm, where an optimal strategy is used in the policy
function to determine when the path exploration should be
stopped to ensure the reliable convergence of the Q-learning
algorithm.
In our work, we consider a multi-preference routing solution
where users are able to set different weights in different
preferences separately, and the suggested route considers different preferences in a balanced manner and requires a short
computation time.
III. BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
In this section, we ﬁrst present the backgrounds. Then, we
present the problem statement.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Road network graph): A road network
graph consists of a ﬁnite set of intersections or nodes
N = {n1 , n2 , ..., nt } and a ﬁnite set of road segments or
edges E = {e1,2 , e2,3 , ..., et−1,t }. An edge ei,j connects of
two adjacent nodes ni and nj . Each edge ei,j possesses a
vector of weights wi,j = {ti,j , fi,j , qi,j }, representing the
cost of travel from node ni to node nj with respect to some
factors (e.g., travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality).
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Route): A route τ in the road network is
deﬁned as a sequence of edges from source node ns to the
destination node nd .
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Normalized value): Let us use yi to denote
the value of an attribute i. We can use the following equation
to normalized yi :
yi − y min
(1)
ŷi = max i min
yi
− yi
where ŷi is the normalized value of yi , and yimax and yimin are
the maximum and minimum values of attribute i, respectively.
Deﬁnition 3.4 (User preferences): A user initially indicates his/her preference weights for different considering attributes (i.e., travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality).
The given user preferences are then represented as a vector
of weights, affecting ﬁnding the optimal route. The user
preference vector Wp is represented as follows:
Wp = [wt , wf , wq ]
s.t. wt + wf + wq = 1, 0 ≤ wi ≤ 1



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(2)

'ƌĂƉŚ ŵĂŝŶƚĞŶĂŶĐĞ
dƌĂǀĞůƚŝŵĞƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ
&ƵĞů ĐŽŶƐƵŵƉƚŝŽŶ
ƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ
ŝƌ ƋƵĂůŝƚǇ ƉƌĞĚŝĐƚŝŽŶ

YͲůĞĂƌŶŝŶŐͲďĂƐĞĚƌŽƵƚŝŶŐ
hƉĚĂƚĞƚŚĞ
ĐƵƌƌĞŶƚ
ƐƚĂƚĞĂŶĚ
ƌĞǁĂƌĚ

hƉĚĂƚĞƚŚĞƌŽĂĚ
ŶĞƚǁŽƌŬŐƌĂƉŚ

WŽůŝĐǇĨƵŶĐƚŝŽŶ͕Y
'ƌĂƉŚƐƚĂƚĞ͕^

•

hƐĞƌ
ƉƌĞĨĞƌĞŶĐĞ

ĐƚŝŽŶ͕
ZŽƵƚĞƐĞůĞĐƚŝŽŶ

Fig. 1. The overview of the proposed multi-preference routing system.

where wt , wf , and wq are the weights of the travel time, fuel
consumption, and air quality. The system normalizes the user
entered weights so that it can consider multiple preferences at
the same time.
Deﬁnition 3.5 (Routing cost): For a given route τ , the total
routing cost rτ is deﬁned as the summation of different attributes (e.g., travel time, fuel consumption, and air pollutants)
of all edges belong to that route τ . Therefore, the total routing
cost rτ can be deﬁned as follows:

rτ =
{ti,j , fi,j , qi,j }
(3)

travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality of different
edges. Then, the proposed system updates each edge’s
attributes accordingly.
The Q-learning based routing module. It utilizes the
updated road network graph to ﬁnd the optimal route
given the source-destination pair and user preferences on
different attributes. Here, the proposed system normalizes
different preference weights to combine them into the
same feature space to decide each route’s signiﬁcance
to satisfy user preferences. In the Q-learning algorithm,
the proposed system traverses each node sequentially
from the source node where the current node (in the
path searching process) acts as the current state, and its
adjacent edges act as the possible actions. Therefore, an
action is to choose one of the adjacent edges of the
current node. Finally, a sequence of edges chosen by
the sequential actions constructs a route from the source
to the destination. The Q-learning algorithm utilizes its
policy function to choose a speciﬁc action.

B. Data Description
We use the followings real-world geo-tagged datasets:
1) Trafﬁc data: The trafﬁc dataset was collected from the
Aarhus, Denmark, which consists of 449 observation points
or intersections. The dataset contains the average velocity between two observation points, the number of vehicles traveled
between two observation points, and the average (and median)
travel time for all vehicles between two observation points.
The data collection frequency was 5 minutes from August 1st,
2014 until September 31st, 2014 [35].
2) Air pollution data: The air pollution dataset covers the
pollution measurements for 449 intermediary points between
different trafﬁc observation points. Therefore, each pair of
trafﬁc observation points corresponds to an air quality collection point. The data collection frequency is 5 minutes. The
data was collected from August 1st, 2014, at 12:05 am until
September 31st at 11:55 pm. The data contains particulate
matter measurements, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide,
sulfur dioxide, and ozone [35].
3) Roadway characteristics and points of interest: We
collected different roadway characteristics and information
about different points of interest (POIs) from the publicly
available OpenStreetMap service as in [15]. we extracted
different roadway characteristics (e.g., road segment type,
corresponding speed limit, road gradients, the number of lanes,
road segment length, the number of trafﬁc signs and signals,
and the number of incoming and outgoing road segments) of
the entire city of Aarhus, Denmark. We also utilized nearby
POIs (e.g., food store, tourist spots, school, ofﬁce, hospital,
bank, and airport), which can affect the roadway’s trafﬁc
volume.

ei,j ∈τ

where ti,j , fi,j , and qi,j are the values of travel time, fuel
consumption, and air pollutants of edge ei,j .
Deﬁnition 3.6 (Optimal route): An optimal route τ ∗ consists
of a ﬁnite set of edges starts from a source node ns to a
destination node nd , where the total routing costs rτ ∗ of
different attributes are not imbalanced considering the given
user preferences on these attributes.
Problem statement. Given a road network graph G(N, E),
where each edge ei,j ∈ E has three attribute values for travel
time, fuel consumption, and air quality and a user’s preference
Wp on the attributes, the user wants to traverse from source
node ns to destination node nd , how to ﬁnd an optimal route in
a timely manner such that the user preference Wp is satisﬁed.
IV. S YSTEM D ESIGN
In this section, we ﬁrst present an overview of the proposed multi-preference route recommendation system in Section IV-A. Then, we introduce the real-world datasets used
in the proposed system in Section IV-B. We also discuss the
road network graph creation and maintenance procedures in
Section IV-C. Next, we present the prediction models used in
the proposed system IV-D. Finally, we present the Q-learning
based multi-preference routing procedure in Section IV-E.
A. Overview
Figure 1 indicates an overview of the proposed multipreference routing system, where there are two main modules
as follows:
• The graph maintenance module. It maintains a real road
network graph where different nodes and edges represent
the road intersection and road segments for a speciﬁc
region. The proposed system periodically predicts the

C. Road Network Graph Map Creation and Maintenance
Here, we describe the road network graph creation and
maintenance procedures from the publicly available geotagged data sources. First, we extracted a static road network



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

information (i.e., the number of vehicles, average speed of
all vehicles, and their travel time).
E. Multi-preference Routing Problem
As in [15], we design three different cost functions for
travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality. We then design
the multi-preference routing algorithm as a multi-objective
optimization problem where the goal is to minimize the
values of three cost functions.
k
We ﬁrst introduce a decision variable zi,j
to represent if an
k
edge ei,j belongs to a route τ starts from the source node ns
and ends at the destination node nd as follows:

1 if ei,j ∈ τ k
k
=
(6)
zi,j
0 if ei,j ∈
/ τk

Fig. 2. The OpenStreetMap version of the city of Aarhus, Denmark [36].

k
is 1 when edge ei,j belongs to the path τ k or vice
where zi,j
k
versa. Then, we use this decision variable zi,j
to represent the
cost function of each attribute as follows.
First, we represent the total travel time to traverse a path
from the source node to the destination node. Let us consider
tki,j to denote the travel time of the vehicle in the edge eki,j ,
which is calculated using the edge length di,j and average
t
of the edge eki,j (as in Equation (5)). Therefore,
speed vi,j
we can represent the total travel time function as the cost
function g1 as follows:

graph of the Aarhus, Denmark, from the OpenStreetMap service, as shown in Figure 2. Each node in the road network map
contains the GPS coordinates of the node. We calculated the
length of each edge from the GPS coordinates. Besides, each
edge has several static spatial information to represent different edge attributes, such as road segment type, speed limits, the
number of lanes, the number of trafﬁc signs and signals, and
the different POIs information. Next, we periodically update
different edge attributes (i.e., travel time, fuel consumption,
and air quality) using the different prediction models based
on historical data sources. We discuss the prediction models
of different edge attributes in the next section.

k
g1 = tki,j zi,j

(7)

Second, we represent the fuel consumption cost to traverse
a speciﬁc path from the source node to the destination
k
to express the fuel consumption
node. Let us represent fi,j
cost for the edge eki,j , where eki,j ∈ τ k . We calculate fuel
k
consumption cost fi,j
as in Equation (4). Therefore, the total
fuel consumption cost function g2 for the given path τ k can
be expressed as follows:

D. Different Prediction Models
In this section, we introduce the three different prediction
models (as in [15]) for three different attributes.
1) Fuel consumption prediction: The fuel consumption
prediction model ﬁrst estimates the average speed proﬁle
of an edge using different roadway characteristics, including
nearby POIs, the number of lanes, the number of incoming
and outgoing road segments, the number of trafﬁc signs and
signals, speed limit, and vehicle counts. It then predicts the
driving force required for a vehicle to travel that edge using
the predicted speed proﬁle. In summary, we estimate the fuel
consumption rate fr for each edge:
(4)
fr = βFdrive v
where β is the fuel consumption rate to produce a single unit
of power, Fdrive is the vehicle driving force, and v is the
current average speed.
2) Travel time prediction: We estimate the average speed
prediction calculated to calculate the travel time of each edge
at a given time t. The travel time prediction utilizes the length
of the edge and the average predicted speed as follows:
d
(5)
t=
v
where d is the length of the edge and v is the average speed
of that edge at time t.
3) Air quality prediction: We use a random forest classiﬁer [37] to predict four air pollutants: particulate matter, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide for each node
of the road network graph. The inputs are different trafﬁc

k k
zi,j
g2 = fi,j

(8)

Third, we consider the overall air quality of a path from the
source node to the destination node. We use the normalized
values of different predicted air substances together to reprek
sent the air quality q as a single criterion. Let us consider qi,j
k
to express the overall air substances present in the edge ei,j .
Therefore, we can formulate the total air quality cost function
g3 for the given path τ k as follows:
k k
zi,j
g3 = qi,j

(9)

Finally, we formulate a multi-objective optimization problem using three cost functions g1 , g2 , and g3 and the given user
preferences Wp =[wt , wf , wq ] for three attributes as follows:
min(g1 · wt , g2 · wf , g3 · wq )
(10)
such that:

k
= {0, 1}, ∀i, j, k
zi,j
wt + w f + w q = 1

(11)
(12)

where Equation (11) represents the decision variable z either
0 or 1. And, Equation (12) presents that the summation of the
user preferences for three attributes that should be equal to 1.



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

F. Q-learning based Routing System
To solve the above multi-objective optimization problem, we
use an RL technique. Speciﬁcally, we employ the Q-learning
algorithm [16] to ﬁnd the optimal route from the source node
to the destination node. Compared to the existing conventional
multi-objective optimization solutions [9]–[11], [15], the Qlearning algorithm is able to provide the optimal solution in a
timely manner.
In the Q-learning algorithm, we use the combinations of
different attributes of each edge along with the user’s preferences on these attributes as well as the edge’s distance to the
destination as the reward of taking that edge. Let us consider
that the proposed routing system works as an agent to choose
the optimal path connecting the source node and destination
node. At each step l, the agent observers the state sl and
chooses an action al . As a result, the current state sl changes
to the next state sl+1 and the agent receives a reward rl based
on the reward policy. The goal of the algorithm is to maximize
the expected cumulative reward by maintaining a certain policy
function, Q(·). During the training time, we build a Q-value
table with the consideration of current road network map
and user preference on different edge attributes to store the
cumulative rewards received by choosing an action dependent
on its previously foreseen states following the certain policy at
each state. We present different components of the Q-learning
algorithm used in the proposed system.
1) Agent: For a given road network graph and sourcedestination pair, the proposed system works as an RL agent
to choose the most suitable action (i.e., choosing an edge)
given the user preferences and predicted edge attributes. After
sequentially taking a few actions, the chosen edges form the
optimal route from the source node to the destination node.
2) Environment: In our scenario, the environment is represented by the updated road network graph, G = (N, E)
(as in Deﬁnition 3.1), where each edge ei,j has three different
attributes in the form of [ti,j ·wt , fi,j ·wf , qi,j ·wq ] that denotes
the predicted travel time, fuel consumption and air quality
values with the given user preferences Wp = [wt , wf , wq ] in
a unit time period.
3) State space (S): In our scenario, the state space represents the ﬁnite set of edges and nodes G = (N, E) with
all possible values of travel time, fuel consumption, and air
quality for each edge of the road network.
4) Action space (A): Action space deﬁnes the set of actions
the agent can choose given the current state (i.e., node (ni )),
source-destination pair (i.e., (ns , nd )), and user preferences on
different edge attributes (i.e., Wp = [wt , wf , wq ]). For example, the agent considers all possible edges ({ei,l , ei,m , ...ei,u })
from the current node (ni ). The agent then chooses one of
the edges considering the attribute values of the edges and the
user’s preference weights Wp .
5) Immediate reward (R): A reward function deﬁnes the
immediate reward gained by choosing a speciﬁc action (i.e.,
an edge ei,j ) from the ﬁnite set of actions. To determine the
immediate reward of choosing an edge, we combine the given
user preference and all predicted values of travel time, fuel

consumption, and air quality of the edge, and we also consider
the direct distance (i.e., length of a straight line) between the
end of the edge (nj ) and the destination node (nd ) in order to
ensure that the vehicle drives towards the destination as fast as
possible. Accordingly, the agent creates a reward table based
on the road network graph (i.e., G = (N, E)), destination node
nd , and the given user’s preference (i.e., Wp = [wt , wf , wq ]).
The reward table is in the form of an adjacency matrix
R|N |×|N | , where |N | represents the total number of nodes
in the road network graph G. Each element ri,j in the reward
table R represents the immediate reward of choosing an action
(i.e., edge ei,j ) from the current state st (i.e., node ni ) to
the next state sl+1 (i.e., node nj ). If nodes ni and nj are
/ E, then the reward is ∞, which
not connected, i.e., ei,j ∈
means that there is no such an edge and it will not be chosen.
Precisely, the immediate reward ri,j is calculated as follows:
ri,j =

⎧
ˆ j , nd )
⎨ −(t̂i,j wt + fˆi,j wf + q̂i,j wq ) + γ d(n
−∞
⎩
+∞

if ei,j ∈ E
/E
if ei,j ∈
if nj = nd

(13)

where t̂i,j , fˆi,j , and q̂i,j are the normalized values of travel
time, fuel consumption, and air quality of edge ei,j as in
ˆ j , ns ) is the normalized
Equation (1), nd is the destination, d(n
direct distance between node nj and the destination nd based
on the maximum and minimum direct distances of any node
pairs in the road network map G as in Deﬁnition 3.3), and γ is
a weight coefﬁcient for this distance. In the Equation (13), the
ﬁrst condition states that if the chosen edge ei,j is a valid edge
in the road network graph, then the agent receives a reward
based on the combination of different attributes and user
preference on them, and the direct distance to the destination
node. The second condition states that the immediate reward
is a considerable negative value if there is no edge between
node ni and node nj . The third constraint states that if the
end of the chosen edge ei,j (nj ) is the destination node nd ,
then the agent receives a considerable positive value as the
immediate reward.
6) Policy function (Q): Upon observing the current state sl ,
the proposed system needs to take the action al of choosing
a speciﬁc edge given the list of possible edges. We create
a Q-value table to keep track of the rewards received by
the policy function during the training time. Like the reward
table, one Q-value table is created for the present combination
of the road network graph and given user preferences (as in
Equation (13)). Using the Q-value table, the proposed system
later selects an action over all possible actions based on the
policy function deﬁned as Q : Q(sl , al ). The policy function
returns the expected future reward due to taking action at at
the state st [16]. Therefore, the agent selects a speciﬁc action
that leads to the maximum expected future reward values using
the following function [16]:
Q(sl , al ) = Q(sl , al ) + α × [rl+1 + γ
×maxal+1 Q(sl+1 , al+1 ) − Q(sl , al )]

(14)

where α is a learning rate parameter to accelerate the convergence of the true Q-values in the presence of any noisy or



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

stochastic rewards and state transitions, and γ is the discount
rate that guarantees the updated reward convergence for all
the future edges from the current node. This policy function is
used to generate the Q-value table in the training phase. In the
following, we elaborate the Q-value table creation procedure.
The agent ﬁrst updates the current road network map and
the corresponding values of travel time, fuel consumption, and
air quality for each edge. Given the user preference, the agent
then updates the immediate reward table using Equation (13).
The agent creates an adjacency matrix Q|N |×|N | to represent
the Q-value table where |N | represents the total number of
nodes. Using the reward table, the agent conducts the training
phase by deriving the state corresponding to a node and its
associated edges, and then updates the Q-value table. At each
iteration of the training phase, the proposed system chooses a
node randomly and updates the Q-value entry for choosing an
edge from that node such that the future reward is maximized
as in Equation (14). Therefore, it checks the current state sl as
the randomly chosen node and ﬁnds the cumulative maximum
reward Q(sl , al ) and update the Q-value table for that particular state and chooses action al . It performs the chosen action
and updated the current state as sl+1 and the immediate reward
as rl+1 . The agent always chooses an action that contributes
to the highest Q(sl , al ) value. Eventually, the Q-value table
represents the future rewards for the edge between two nodes.
7) Optimal route selection: After the training phase, the
proposed system utilized the most updated Q-value table to
select the optimal route from the source node. The proposed
system keeps choosing a list of nodes and edges from the
source node until there is a valid route from the source node
to the destination node. Here, the proposed system chooses
the edge corresponding to the maximum Q-value from all
possible edges. Speciﬁcally, it ﬁnds different adjacent nodes
from the current node, and retrieves the Q-values of these
edges from the most updated Q-value table. Therefore, the
multi-preference route selection problem is limited to looking
up the Q-value table and choosing the node with the highest
reward. This lookup operation reduces the complexity of the
multi-objective optimization problem and reduces the problem
solving time to near real-time.

We implemented all comparative methods using the python
programming language.
• Road network graph map. The road network map (see
Figure 2) was realized using the NetworkX API [38] from
the osm ﬁle of the city of Aarhus, Denmark. The osm
ﬁle was generated from the OpenStreetMap service [36],
and it has more than 233 MB. The road network graph
consists of 44, 012 nodes and 84, 154 edges. Several roadway
characteristics, POIs, and other factors affecting a roadway’s
speed proﬁle were also extracted from the OpenStreetMap
service. We considered all POIs within 500 meters radius of
an edge. To calculate the overall inﬂuence of the POIs close
to an edge, we considered the direct distances between the
POIs and that edge. Therefore, we considered the POIs closer
to the edge has a greater inﬂuence on the edge’s average
speed. We updated the travel time and fuel consumption of
each edge of the road network map at every 5 minutes and
updated the air quality of each edge every 60 minutes.
• The number of routes. We considered 30 randomly chosen
source-destination pairs from the road network graph to
conduct all routing experiments. The source-destination pairs
were chosen so that the direct distance between the pair of
source and destination is at least 10 km.
2) Comparison methods: We implemented our system and
three different comparison methods. We describe our system
and the comparison systems below.
• Q-learning. It is our proposed routing system. We used
50,000 iterations in the training phase to ﬁnalize the Q-value
table. In each iteration, one source-destination pair and their
intermediate edges were chosen randomly from the sets of
nodes and edges to update the Q-value table accordingly.
During the experimental process, the Q-value table was also
updated. We set γ = 0.7 and α = 0.6.
• PreGo [13]. PreGo is a dynamic routing algorithm that uses
real-time trafﬁc congestion to suggest the optimal route from
a source to a destination with the goal of minimizing two
different attributes (i.e., travel time and fuel consumption)
with equal priority at the same time. PreGo uses the dynamic A* algorithm as the optimization solution to solve
the multi-preference routing problem. We implemented the
PreGo using python programming language, and we followed
steps of the time parameterized multi-preference shortest path
algorithm as in [13] to implement PreGo.
• MORP [9]. MORP uses a multi-objective optimization solution to ﬁnd the optimal route from the source node to the
destination node. It considers travel time, fuel consumption,
and air quality equally in ﬁnding the optimal route. However,
MORP does not consider any user preference, and it requires
a longer time (e.g., several hours depending on the map size)
to provide the optimal solution due to the multi-dimensional
hyper-grid search space of the optimization solution.
• VRT [15]. VRT combines the given user preference into a
multi-objective optimization solution to generate the optimal
route satisfying the user preferences. It requires a longer time
to determine the optimal route due to the multi-dimensional
hyper-grid searching procedure as in [9].

V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the multi-preference route
recommendation system considering different metrics. First,
we introduce the experimental settings used to evaluate the
system (Section V-A). Then, we present the performance of the
proposed multi-preference routing system compared to other
existing systems regarding travel time, fuel consumption, and
air quality (Section V-B).
A. Experimental Settings
1) Experimental environments:
• Computing resources. We conducted all experiments in
a shared university GPU cluster consisting of four Nvidia
RTX 2080Ti GPUs with 20 cores and 256 GB memory.



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ϲϬϬ

YͲůĞĂƌŶŝŶŐ

dƌĂǀĞůƚŝŵĞ

WƌĞ'Ž

&ƵĞů
ĐŽŶƐƵŵƉƚŝŽŶ

DKZW

sZd

dŝŵĞ;ŵŝŶƵƚĞƐͿ

ϭ͘Ϯ
ϭ
Ϭ͘ϴ
Ϭ͘ϲ
Ϭ͘ϰ
Ϭ͘Ϯ
Ϭ

YͲůĞĂƌŶŝŶŐ

dƌĂǀĞůƚŝŵĞ

WƌĞ'Ž

&ƵĞů
ĐŽŶƐƵŵƉƚŝŽŶ

DKZW

YͲůĞĂƌŶŝŶŐ

WƌĞ'Ž

DKZW

sZd

ϰϬϬ
ϯϬϬ

ϮϬϬ
ϭϬϬ
Ϭ

ŝƌƉŽůůƵƚĂŶƚƐ

^ĐĞŶĂƌŝŽϭ

^ĐĞŶĂƌŝŽϮ

Fig. 5. Total computation time.

Fig. 3. Normalized routing results of different systems in scenario 1.

ϭ͘Ϯ
ϭ
Ϭ͘ϴ
Ϭ͘ϲ
Ϭ͘ϰ
Ϭ͘Ϯ
Ϭ

ϱϬϬ

the consideration of different attributes. We can see that the
proposed Q-learning based routing system’s results are almost
similar to MORP and VRT. It means that the proposed Qlearning-based routing system suggests a very similar route to
the Pareto optimal solution.
Second, in Figure 4, we can see that the results of PreGO
and MORP are similar. Both PreGO and MORP do not
consider any user preference. The proposed Q-learning based
routing system and the existing VRT system consider the
given user preference and these methods minimize travel time
and fuel consumption in scenario 2 based on the given user
preferences. We can also see that the routing results by Qlearning and VRT for three attributes are similar. It means that
the proposed Q-learning based route recommendation system
is able to provide an optimal solution as VRT does.
2) Total computation time: Figure 5 shows the total computation times of four methods. In scenario 1, the total required
times of Q-learning, PreGo, MORP, and VRT are 1.29 mins,
354.54 mins, 453.31 mins, and 453.31 mins, respectively. In
scenario 2, the total required times of Q-learning, PreGo,
MORP, and VRT are 1.45 mins, 354.54 mins, 453.31 mins,
and 396.40 mins, respectively. The total required times of four
methods follow: Q-learning<<PreGO<VRT≈MORP, where
we use << to represent signiﬁcantly less. From the above
results, we can see that the proposed Q-learning based multipreference route recommendation system requires signiﬁcantly
less time compared with the other three multi-preference routing systems. Due to the quick Q-value table lookup operation
in the proposed system, the total computing time is negligible.
The proposed system can provide route suggestions in a timely
manner. We can see that MORP and VRT cost much time to
provide the Pareto-optimal solutions.
3) Discussion: From the above ﬁgures, we can ﬁrst see that
PreGo suggests routes with higher travel and fuel consumption
and low air quality. MORP provides the Pareto-optimal routes
but fails to consider any user preferences on different routing
attributes. VRT also provides the Pareto-optimal routes, and
it is able to consider the user preferences on different routing attributes as well. However, MORP and VRT cost very
high computation time. Finally, we also see that the routes
suggested by the proposed Q-learning based routing system
are close to the Pareto-optimal solutions. It can consider user
preferences for different routing attributes and provides routing
suggestions in near real-time.

sZd

ŝƌƉŽůůƵƚĂŶƚƐ

Fig. 4. Normalized routing results of different systems in scenario 2.

3) User preferences: We considered two scenarios of user
preference weights on travel time, fuel consumption, and air
quality represented by a vector as follows:
• Scenario 1: [0.33, 0.33, 0.33]. In this user preference scenario, we considered equal weights for travel time, fuel
consumption, and air quality.
• Scenario 2: [0.50, 0.50, 0.00]. In this user preference scenario, the user does not have a preference for air quality and has
equal weights for travel time and fuel consumption.
4) Evaluation metrics: To illustrate the experimental evaluations using ﬁgures, we ﬁrst normalized the values of travel
time, fuel consumption, and air quality for better illustration
(as described in Deﬁnition 3.3). Then, we calculated the
average of these normalized values to combine the results from
30 routes to be shown in the ﬁgures.
To show the total computation time, we calculated the
average of total computation times for 60 different routes
without any normalization.
B. Experimental Results
1) Multi-preference routing: Figure 3 and Figure 4 show
the routing results of four methods regarding travel time, fuel
consumption, and air quality in the two scenarios.
First, from Figure 3, we can see that PreGo chooses routes
with higher travel time, fuel consumption, and air pollutants
than other methods. PreGo suggests a route that is not Paretooptimal since it discards some optimal routes in ﬁnding the
solution using the dynamic A* algorithm. Therefore, PreGo
generates higher travel time, fuel consumption, and air pollutants. Both MORP and VRT use the adaptive epsilon constrain
optimization solution [9], which ensure the Pareto-optimally
between different attributes and provide an optimal route with



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VI. C ONCLUSION

[12] C. Guo, B. Yang, O. Andersen, C. S. Jensen, and K. Torp, “Ecosky:
Reducing vehicular environmental impact through eco-routing,” in Proc.
of ICDE, 2015.
[13] A. M. Hendawi, A. Rustum, A. A. Ahmadain, D. Hazel, A. Teredesai,
D. Oliver, M. Ali, and J. A. Stankovic, “Smart personalized routing for
smart cities,” in Proc. of ICDE, 2017.
[14] D. Quercia, R. Schifanella, and L. M. Aiello, “The shortest path to
happiness: Recommending beautiful, quiet, and happy routes in the city,”
in Proc. of HT, 2014.
[15] A. Sarker, H. Shen, B. Murphy, R. Wang, M. Devine, and A. J. Rindos,
“Vehicle routing trifecta: Data-driven route recommendation system,” in
Proc. of ICCCN, 2019.
[16] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine learning, vol. 8, no.
3-4, 1992.
[17] Y. Li, H. Su, U. Demiryurek, B. Zheng, T. He, and C. Shahabi, “Pare:
A system for personalized route guidance,” in Proc. of WWW, 2017.
[18] R. K. Ganti, N. Pham, H. Ahmadi, S. Nangia, and T. F. Abdelzaher,
“Greengps: a participatory sensing fuel-efﬁcient maps application,” in
Proc. of MobiSys, 2010.
[19] Y. Ding, C. Chen, S. Zhang, B. Guo, Z. Yu, and Y. Wang, “Greenplanner:
Planning personalized fuel-efﬁcient driving routes using multi-sourced
urban data,” in Proc. of PerCom, 2017.
[20] E. Koukoumidis, L.-S. Peh, and M. R. Martonosi, “Signalguru: leveraging mobile phones for collaborative trafﬁc signal schedule advisory,” in
Proc. of MobiSys, 2011.
[21] L. Kang, B. Qi, D. Janecek, and S. Banerjee, “Ecodrive: A mobile
sensing and control system for fuel efﬁcient driving,” in Proc. of
MobiCom, 2015.
[22] L. Kang, H. Shen, and A. Sarker, “Velocity optimization of pure electric
vehicles with trafﬁc dynamics consideration,” in Proc. of ICDCS, 2017.
[23] J. Shang, Y. Zheng, W. Tong, E. Chang, and Y. Yu, “Inferring gas
consumption and pollution emission of vehicles throughout a city,” in
Proc. of SIGKDD, 2014.
[24] G. Macrina, G. Laporte, F. Guerriero, and L. D. P. Pugliese, “An energyefﬁcient green-vehicle routing problem with mixed vehicle ﬂeet, partial
battery recharging and time windows,” European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 276, no. 3, 2019.
[25] Z. Wang and J.-B. Sheu, “Vehicle routing problem with drones,”
Transportation research part B: methodological, vol. 122, 2019.
[26] A. I. Panov, K. S. Yakovlev, and R. Suvorov, “Grid path planning with
deep reinforcement learning: Preliminary results,” Procedia computer
science, vol. 123, 2018.
[27] Z. Cao, H. Guo, J. Zhang, F. Oliehoek, U. Fastenrath et al., “Maximizing
the probability of arriving on time: A practical q-learning method,” in
Proc. of AAAI, 2017.
[28] A. Konar, I. G. Chakraborty, S. J. Singh, L. C. Jain, and A. K. Nagar, “A
deterministic improved q-learning for path planning of a mobile robot,”
IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 43, no. 5,
2013.
[29] W. Xia, C. Di, H. Guo, and S. Li, “Reinforcement learning based
stochastic shortest path ﬁnding in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, 2019.
[30] H. Yu and D. P. Bertsekas, “Q-learning and policy iteration algorithms
for stochastic shortest path problems,” Annals of Operations Research,
vol. 208, no. 1, 2013.
[31] A. Pessoa, R. Sadykov, E. Uchoa, and F. Vanderbeck, “A generic
exact solver for vehicle routing and related problems,” Mathematical
Programming, 2020.
[32] J. Xu, Y. Gao, C. Liu, L. Zhao, and Z. Ding, “Efﬁcient route search on
hierarchical dynamic road networks,” Distributed and Parallel Databases, vol. 33, no. 2, 2015.
[33] H. Wang, G. Li, H. Hu, S. Chen, B. Shen, H. Wu, W.-S. Li, and K.-L.
Tan, “R3: a real-time route recommendation system,” Proc. of the VLDB
Endowment, vol. 7, no. 13, 2014.
[34] M. Han, P. Senellart, S. Bressan, and H. Wu, “Routing an autonomous
taxi with reinforcement learning,” in Proc. of CIKM, 2016.
[35] M. I. Ali, F. Gao, and A. Mileo, “Citybench: A conﬁgurable benchmark
to evaluate rsp engines using smart city datasets,” in Proc. of ISWC,
2015.
[36] OpenStreetMap contributors, “Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org ,” https://www.openstreetmap.org , 2020.
[37] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, no. 1, 2001.
[38] N. Developers, “Networkx,” networkx. lanl. gov, 2010.

We proposed a multi-preference route recommendation system considering user preferences on travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality to choose the optimal route timely.
Speciﬁcally, we designed a Q-learning-based route recommendation system that utilizes the real network graph created from
different real-world datasets (i.e., trafﬁc data, air pollution,
and roadway characteristics). The proposed Q-learning method
builds a Q-value table using the reward table and given a
road network map to decide future rewards for choosing a
sequence of edges from the source to the destination. In
this way, the proposed route recommendation system is able
to choose a well-balanced optimal route from the source to
the destination satisfying user preferences on different edge
attributes timely. From the experimental evaluations, we found
that the proposed routing system can provide an optimal route
timely considering user preferences on different attributes. In
the future, we will enhance the performance of the proposed
Q-learning algorithm by incorporating a deep learning network
to estimate the Q-value table in real-time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by U.S. NSF grants
NSF-1827674, CCF-1822965, Microsoft Research Faculty
Fellowship 8300751, and IBM Ph.D. fellowship award 20172018. The authors would like to thank Mr. Tanmoy Sen and
Mr. Shohaib Mahmud for their valuable suggestions.
R EFERENCES
[1] “Google Maps Platform,” https://cloud.google.com/maps-platform/, accessed: 2020-08-15.
[2] “HERE Maps: Map Data is the foundation of the Reality Index,”
https://www.here.com/platform/mapping/map-data, accessed: 2020-0815.
[3] P. Apparicio, J. Gelb, M. Carrier, M.-È. Mathieu, and S. Kingham,
“Exposure to noise and air pollution by mode of transportation during
rush hours in montreal,” Journal of Transport Geography, vol. 70, 2018.
[4] S. Mahajan, Y.-S. Tang, D.-Y. Wu, T.-C. Tsai, and L.-J. Chen, “Car:
The clean air routing algorithm for path navigation with minimal pm2.
5 exposure on the move,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 2019.
[5] D. Robert, M. Brook, and H. Center, “The global threat of outdoor
ambient air pollution to cardiovascular health time for intervention,”
2017.
[6] M.-A. Kioumourtzoglou, J. D. Schwartz, M. G. Weisskopf, S. J. Melly,
Y. Wang, F. Dominici, and A. Zanobetti, “Long-term pm2. 5 exposure
and neurological hospital admissions in the northeastern united states,”
Environmental health perspectives, vol. 124, no. 1, 2016.
[7] “Waze Lets Israelis Avoid Palestinian Areas, but Not the Other
Way Around,” https://motherboard.vice.com/en˙us/article/jpgbg7/wazelets-jewish-israelis-avoid-palestinian-areas-but-not-the-other-way
-around, 2017.
[8] “Waze Puts Safety Over Speed by Minimizing Left Turns,”
https://www.citylab.com/life/2016/06/waze-puts-safety-over-speedby-minimizing-left-turns-in-la/487577/, 2017.
[9] A. Sarker, H. Shen, and J. A. Stankovic, “Morp: Data-driven multiobjective route planning and optimization for electric vehicles,” Proc.
of the ACM on IMWUT, vol. 1, no. 4, p. 162, 2018.
[10] Y.-N. Guo, J. Cheng, S. Luo, D. Gong, and Y. Xue, “Robust dynamic
multi-objective vehicle routing optimization method,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
on CBB, vol. 15, no. 6, 2017.
[11] Y. Qi, Z. Hou, H. Li, J. Huang, and X. Li, “A decomposition based
memetic algorithm for multi-objective vehicle routing problem with time
windows,” Computers & Operations Research, vol. 62, 2015.



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:34:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

