This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

Urban Traffic Route Guidance Method With High
Adaptive Learning Ability Under Diverse
Traffic Scenarios
Chuanhui Tang , Wenbin Hu , Simon Hu, and Marc E. J. Stettler
Abstract— With the rapid development of urbanization,
the problem of urban traffic congestion has become increasingly
prominent. Dynamic route guidance promises to improve the
capacity of urban traffic management and mitigate traffic congestion in big cities. In the design of simulation-based experiments
for most dynamic route guidance methods, the simulation data
is generally estimated from a specific traffic scenario in the
real-world. However, highly dynamic traffic in the city implies
that traffic scenarios in real systems are diverse. Therefore,
if a route guidance method cannot adjust its strategy according
to the spatial and temporal characteristics of different traffic
scenarios, then it cannot guarantee optimal results under all
traffic scenarios. Thus, ideal dynamic route guidance methods
should have a highly adaptive learning ability under diverse
traffic scenarios so as to have extensive improvement capabilities
for different traffic scenarios. In this study, an A∗ trajectory
rejection method based on multi-agent reinforcement learning
(A∗ R2 ) is proposed; the method integrates both system and
user perspectives to mitigate traffic congestion and reduce travel
time (TT) and travel distance (TD). First, owing to its adaptive
learning ability, the A∗ R2 can comprehensively analyze the
traffic conditions for different traffic scenarios and intelligently
evaluate the road congestion index from a system perspective.
Then, the A∗ R2 determines the routes for all vehicles from
user perspective according to the road network congestion index.
An extensive set of simulation experiments reveal that, under
various traffic scenarios, the A∗ R2 can rely on its adaptive
learning ability to achieve better traffic efficiency. Moreover,
even in cases where many drivers are not fully compliant with
the route guidance, the traffic efficiency can still be improved
significantly by A∗ R2 .
Index Terms— Urban transportation network, traffic congestion, dynamic route guidance, reinforcement learning,
A∗ algorithm.

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

ODERN urban transportation networks are highly
complex systems with interdependency. With the fast
development of modern society, urban traffic congestion has
Manuscript received November 6, 2018; revised June 21, 2019 and
October 17, 2019; accepted February 24, 2020. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 61572369 and Grant 61711530238. The Associate Editor for this article
was H. Jula. (Corresponding authors: Wenbin Hu; Simon Hu.)
Chuanhui Tang and Wenbin Hu are with the School of Computer Science,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: tangchuanhui@whu.edu.cn;
hwb@whu.edu.cn).
Simon Hu is with the College of Civil Engineering and Architecture,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, and also with the Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department, Imperial College London, London
SW7 2BU, U.K. (e-mail: simonhu@zju.edu.cn).
Marc E. J. Stettler is with the Civil and Environmental Engineering
Department, Imperial College London, London SW7 2BU, U.K. (e-mail:
m.stettler@imperial.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2020.2978227

become a daily problem in many cities owing to the increase
in traffic demands. Route guidance in a dynamic environment,
which is a hot research topic in the field of intelligent
transportation system (ITS), promises to improve the capacity
of urban traffic management and mitigate traffic congestion in
big cities. One consensus in many route guidance methods
is to avoid traffic congestion as much as possible [1]–[4].
Traditionally, using traffic flow guidance has been suggested
as a means of improving traffic efficiency to a certain degree;
hence, many big cities have been vastly installing variable
message signs (VMS) or using the radio to broadcast real-time
traffic flow information. However, the information in these
systems is open to all drivers, and congestion can easily be
transferred to different parts of the network.
The route guidance of urban traffic is essentially the shortest
path problem in graph theory. The A∗ algorithm is the basic
method for solving this problem, and a considerable amount
of research has been done toward such an end [5]–[8]. In [6],
an improved A∗ algorithm is proposed to improve the reliability of route guidance in which penalties are added to roads
with a high probability of congestion. In our variant of the
A∗ algorithm, however, the penalties added are based on the
past travel trajectory of each vehicle. The A∗ algorithm is
widely used because it is easy to modify and is highly efficient
in searching for optimal solutions. For instance, in [7] a
bidirectional time-varying optimal path algorithm based on an
improved heuristic function and a backward search technology
was proposed; it significantly increased the path solving speed.
In addition to these deterministic algorithms, there are also
some heuristic algorithms [9]–[11] that can provide different
best or suboptimal routes according to certain traffic scenarios.
Many methods try to estimate the prevailing conditions or
predicted conditions of a network [12]. These methods can be
divided into two categories: short-term prediction [13], [14]
and long-term prediction [15], [16]. Some methods use only
current data [17], others take into account only historical
data [18], while [19] integrate historical and current data.
Traffic prediction can be very beneficial to drivers, but it is
possible that a best match will not be found in the historical
data database owing to changes in traffic patterns. Unlike most
prediction methods, our method predicts the road congestion
index rather than the road travel time (TT).
Route guidance methods have been studied from the system’s perspective and/or the user’s perspective. User-oriented
route guidance methods that focus on a user’s preferences
have long been studied [20]–[22]. The shortest TT or travel
distance (TD) is the primary consideration for such systems.

1524-9050 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

This may lead to traffic congestion because the optimal path
for the user is the path that only maximizes the user’s preferences. Route guidance methods for finding the system-optimal
traffic distribution have also been studied [23]–[25]. It is
well-known that a system-oriented guidance system sometimes seems unfair because certain users’ preferences are
sacrificed for the sake of the system’s interests. Thus, in a
system-oriented guidance system, when the unfairness reaches
a certain level, the user may not follow the route guidance,
thereby violating the original intention of the system optimization. By restraining users’ selfish behavior or avoiding
congested roads, a compromise can be achieved between
individual and global benefits [1], [3], [26].
A multi-agent system (MAS) has been widely used in
route guidance [27]–[29], because it has the characteristics of
self-adaptation and cooperation, and can exchange information
effectively and in real-time based on VANET [30]–[32]. For
instance, Cao et al. [2] proposed a pheromone-based MAS,
in which infrastructure agents collect pheromones left by
vehicle agents on the road to predict the road congestion level
in the near future. Currently, with the continuous development
of machine learning, optimization algorithms based on reinforcement learning (RL) have been a research frontier of ITS
in recent years [33]–[35]. Given the inherent nature of high
dynamics and uncertainty of the urban traffic system, ITS is
an excellent application scenario for multi-agent RL (MARL)
algorithm [36]. Compared with its application in traffic signal
optimization [37], [38], the application of RL in route guidance
is still in its infancy. In [35], the author introduces the concept
of node pressure to the traffic control system, and proposes a
multi-agent static-route calculation method via RL. In [39],
Sadek shows the feasibility of using RL to provide on-line
dynamic route guidance for drivers by deploying a single
self-learning agent on a simple network. In order to avoid
congestion and reduce traffic delays, Arokhlo et al. [40]
proposed a MARL method to calculate the minimum cost
path from the origin to the destination. To the best of our
knowledge, there are few studies on the application of MARL
in route guidance [41], because the curse of dimensionality
is the main challenge. In this study, we apply a new MARL
model to dynamic route guidance, which not only effectively
reduces the complexity of the algorithm, but also realizes
cooperation between agents.
Traffic simulation is a powerful tool for obtaining actual
effects that cannot be obtained from analytical methods.
To determine the effectiveness of a route guidance method,
a simulation-based experiment is usually conducted. However,
the simulation data are generally estimated from a specific
traffic scenario in the real-world, as it is difficult to estimate
all traffic scenarios in the real-world. Therefore, if a route
guidance method cannot adjust its strategy according to the
spatio-temporal characteristics of different traffic scenarios,
then it cannot guarantee optimal results under all traffic
scenarios. Although most dynamic route guidance methods
have a certain degree of dependence on simulation data owing
to their lack of adaptive capabilities, there are still some
methods that can be used to overcome this problem, such
as the dynamic traffic assignment (DTA) [42]–[44] algorithm;

Fig. 1.

Overview of the proposed method.

however, the DTA is not a viable solution for real-time traffic
guidance because of its high time complexity and the need to
know the origin-destination (OD) set before iteration.
In this study, we propose an A∗ trajectory rejection method
based on multi-agent RL (A∗ R2 ) to effectively mitigate traffic
congestion and to reduce the TT and TD under diverse traffic
scenarios. To achieve this goal, the A∗ R2 is designed to
integrate both system and user perspectives, i.e., to mitigate
the traffic congestion of the system and reduce the TT and
TD for the users. The A∗ R2 method consists of two parts:
the modular Q-learning (MQ) algorithm and the A∗ trajectory
rejection (A∗ R) algorithm. First, based on the MQ algorithm,
which is an improved MARL, the A∗ R2 can comprehensively
analyze the traffic conditions and intelligently evaluate the
road congestion index from a network level. Then, based on
the A∗ R algorithm, the A∗ R2 determines the routes for all the
vehicles in the road network from a user perspective according
to the congestion index of road network. Because RL has
lower requirements for system prior knowledge, it is good
at learning the new traffic scenario and has strong adaptive
ability for different traffic scenarios. Thus, irrespective of the
traffic scenario, the A∗ R2 can learn the best strategy to mitigate
traffic congestion from a system perspective and increase
traffic efficiency from user perspective adaptively.
The major contributions of this study are as follows: (1) An
MARL algorithm used for avoiding system-level traffic congestion takes into account the traffic conditions of upstream
and downstream roads that have a direct impact on road
condition; (2) a variant of the A∗ algorithm used for reducing
the TT and TD from the user perspective avoids choosing
the road that has been used by imposing penalties on it; and
(3) a dynamic route guidance method with strong adaptive
learning ability that can adjust its strategy according to the
spatio-temporal characteristics of different traffic scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II presents the system architecture of A∗ R2 method.
Section III describes our proposed method. Section IV presents
the simulation of the A∗ R2 method inner city transportation
network and provides experimental results. Section V concludes the paper.
II. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
This section presents the system architecture of the A∗ R2
method. Fig. 1 illustrates the three key components of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

system: location services (LS), a traffic control center (TCC),
and vehicle agents (VAs).
The LS are used to obtain the real-time location of vehicles,
which is used to compute the traffic condition on the network.
The TCC aims to improve traffic efficiency from the system
perspective and is dedicated to mitigating traffic congestion on
the network. In this system architecture, the TCC generates a
virtual road agent (VRA) for every single road in the network.
Each VRA first obtains information about the road it controls
from the LS; it then applies the MQ algorithm to calculate
the travel cost of each road in the network. There are various
criteria to define the travel cost of roads in road networks, such
as the TT of roads. In our study, we define the travel cost of a
road as the congestion index, which is determined by the action
taken by the corresponding VRA (detailed in Section III), and
its value is equal to the free flow TT multiplied by a real
number greater than one. The congestion index is set by the
VRA to achieve traffic equilibrium from the network level
based on real-time traffic conditions.
The VAs elaborate on how to improve traffic efficiency from
the user perspective with the objective to minimize the TT
and TD. Each VA deployed on a vehicle applies the A∗ R
algorithm, providing the vehicle with capabilities to find the
user-optimal route according to the congestion index of the
road network. Obviously, each VA can work independently,
so the working mode of VAs is decentralized.
The work of the TCC and VAs can be seen as being
independent of each other, so the proposed system is a
hierarchical architecture in which the TCC centrally calculates
the congestion index of the road network from the system
perspective, while all VAs determine user-optimal routes in a
decentralized mode.
The overview of the proposed method is as shown in Fig. 1.
First, the LS are used to determine the number of vehicles on
each road in the road network. Then, the data, which represents
the current traffic condition, is transmitted to the TCC. The
TCC will set a congestion index for all roads to manage traffic.
Finally, the congestion index of each road will be delivered
to the VAs of all vehicles to provide decision-making support
for each vehicle.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
This section describes the methods we proposed in this
study. The A∗ R2 method consists of two parts, the MQ
algorithm and the A∗ R algorithm. In the next few subsections,
we will introduce the MQ and A∗ R algorithm in detail.
A. MQ Algorithm
The detailed process of computing the network congestion
index is shown in Algorithm 1. The process is repeated until
all vehicles have reached their destinations. It should be noted
that the time interval in this paper is represented by σ , and
its optimal setting is discussed in the experiment part in
Section IV.
The goal of the MQ algorithm is to obtain an accurate
estimation of road travel cost according to the spatial and
temporal characteristics of different traffic scenarios. With the
agent acting as a process controller, the environment of the

3

Algorithm 1 Compute the Network Congestion Index
Input : The number of vehicles on each road;
Output: The congestion index of the network.
1: for time t =1, 2, 3 . . . do
2: Get the number of vehicles on each road in the road
network
3: for each VRA do
4:
Use the MQ algorithm to calculate the congestion index
of the corresponding road
5: end for
6: Output the congestion index of the network
7: end for

transportation system can be modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) to describe the interaction between the
transportation system environment and the agent. The optimal
strategy for an MDP can be solved by RL. Single-agent RL,
such as the Q-learning algorithm, is the focus of most studies.
The optimal strategy for the agent in an arbitrary state st is
to select action at for the largest Q t (st , at ); then, by any
Q 0 value function, if the agent selects the action at each
iteration according to the following formula, then after an
infinite number of iterations, the sequence Q t will converge
to the optimal value.
Q t (st , at ) = (1 − α)Q t −1 (st , at )


+ α r t + γ maxat+1 ∈A Q t −1 (st +1 , at +1 ) (1)
where α ∈ (0,1) is the learning rate and γ ∈ (0,1) is the
discount factor.
However, in the Q-learning algorithm, the single agent
greedily maximizes its own utility without taking into account
the impact of decisions made by other agents. To overcome
this problem, the system can be modeled as an MARL
model. The simplest MARL is a combination of all the single
agents, in which each VRA can cooperate with all the other
VRAs to optimize the traffic network state by analyzing the
possible impacts of other VRAs and making better decisions.
However, the problem of dimensionality is the major challenge
associated with the application of MARL to a route guidance
problem. In road network G, each VRA needs to maintain a
table whose size is |S1 |×. . .×|S M |×|A1 |×. . .×| A M |, where
M is the number of road sections, Si represents the state spaces
for road i , and Ai represents the action spaces. Thus, with
an increase in agents, MARL encounters the dimensionality
problem that is due to the exponential increases in both joint
state and joint action spaces. The problem of dimensionality
not only results in a large use of memory space, but also leads
to slow convergence of Q functions.
Therefore, we designed a new coordination mechanism to
avoid these problems. First, we designed an RL mechanism
between two agents, which we termed 2-agent RL. Then, based
on 2-agent RL, we proposed MARL, i.e., the MQ algorithm,
in which the VRA of each road can form multiple incidences
of 2-agent RL with neighboring VRAs, and these 2-agents
together form a module.
In the following subsection, we first present the definitions
and notations of the MQ algorithm. Then, we will introduce

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the mechanism of a 2-agent RL, because it is the basis of the
MQ algorithm. Finally, we will present an implementation of
the MQ algorithm.
1) Definitions and Notations: Given an urban road network
G = (E,V ), which consists of a set of road sections (directed
edge, i.e., two different directions of a real road will be
regarded as two different road sections) E = {E 1 ,E 2 ,…,E M }
(M is the number of road sections) and a set of intersections
V = {V1 ,V2 ,…,VN } (N is the number of intersections). The
agent VRA on road i is denoted as VRAi where i ∈ E. Before
describing our model in detail, we first introduce the definitions of state, action, and reward in our algorithm, because
they are fundamental concepts in designing RL systems.
State: Number of Vehicles. On each road, the number
of vehicles is a key factor determining whether the road is
congested. Therefore, in order to considerably simplify the
design and reduce the space complexity of MARL, the VRA’s
state is designed to be represented by the total number of
vehicles on the corresponding road.
Action: Congestion index of the road. The action of
VRA is designed to reduce congestion from the system’s
perspective and will effectively manage the traffic flow of each
road in the next time period. Therefore, the VRA’s action is
designed to represent the variable congestion index of the road.
The congestion index is set by the VRA to achieve traffic
equilibrium from the network level; it can be used as the
travel cost of the road. The road congestion index is negatively
correlated with the expectation for road traffic in the next time
period, that is, the larger the value, the less desirable it is for
more vehicles to use the road. In this paper, any action in the
action space is the free flow TT multiplied by a real number
greater than one and less than 5.
Reward: Reduction in the distance of the corresponding
road between the number of vehicles and optimal flow.
Where ’distance’ is defined as |Number of Vehicles − Optimal
Flow|. In this paper, the difference between the distance of
two successive decision points is defined as the reward for
the corresponding VRA. After executing the selected action,
the reward can be positive or negative. The reward is positive
only when the distance between the number of vehicles and
the optimal flow is reduced. Otherwise, it is negative, which
implies that the action results in a low road utilization or
congestion.
O Fi (i.e., optimal flow of road i ): The optimal traffic
flow of road i . On a road, the low level of traffic leads to
underutilization of the road (waste of road resources). However, a high volume of traffic will result in congestion, which
will reduce traffic efficiency. We define optimal flow (O F) as
the optimal traffic flow of the road, where ’optimal’ implies
that the vehicle number will neither result in congestion nor
underutilization of the road. The optimal traffic flow depends
on certain physical attributes of the road. These attributes are
listed in TABLE I.
According to the attributes described in TABLE I, O Fi is
calculated as follows:
O Fi = lan i × len i × sth i × r toi × gr di × s f yi × FO F %
(2)

TABLE I
P HYSICAL ATTRIBUTES OF THE ROAD

TABLE II
N OTATION OF MQ A LGORITHM

where FO F is the optimal flow coefficient of the transportation
network, which adjusts the calculation of optimal flow. If the
number of vehicles in the entire transportation network is very
small, then the FO F can be set to a smaller value. If the
number of vehicles is very large, then FO F should be set to a
larger value. The setting of FO F has a large influence on the
effect of the algorithm, which is studied in Section IV.
TABLE II presents the notation system to be used in the
MQ algorithm.
2) 2-Agent RL: There are many modules in our model, and
each module is centered on a VRA. Each module contains
multiple incidences of 2-agent RL, which are formed between
the center VRA and each neighboring VRA. We will now
introduce the definitions of 2-agent RL.
Definition 1: 2-agent RL in this paper can be represented
by the tuple {S, A, P, R}, where
• S = Si × S j is the discrete joint state space of VRA i and
VRA j , where Si and S j are referred the local state spaces

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

of VRAi and VRA j , respectively. Local here implies that
the components belong to just one VRA.
• A = A i × A j is the discrete joint action space of VRA i
and VRA j , where Ai and A j are referred to as the action
spaces of
 VRAi and
 VRA j , respectively.
• P = P A i |S, A j is the transition probability function.


p ai |s, a j is the probability that VRAi takes the action
ai when VRA j takes the action a j at the joint state
s, where ai ∈ Ai , a j ∈ A j , and s ∈ S. Obviously,
the
map is subject to the constraint
  probability

 transition
p
a
|s,
a
=
1.

j
ai ∈Ai
i


• R = R(S, A, S) is the reward function. r s, a, s  is the
reward when VRAi and VRA j take the joint action a ∈ A
at the joint stage s ∈ S.
Definition 2: A 2-agent RL is said to be reward independent
if there exist ri and r j such that






ri j s, a, s  = ri si , si + r j s j , s j

(3)







where s = si , s j , a = ai , a j , and s  = si , s j , respectively. In other words, the overall reward of VRAi and VRA j
is composed of two independent reward functions, each of
which depends only on the local state and next local state of
the VRAs.
Definition 3: A 2-agent RL is said to be transition independent if the transition probability function p is subject to




p a j |s, ai = p a j |s


p ai |s, a j = p (ai |s)

(4)
(5)

where s ∈ S. In other words, the new action of each VRA
depends only on its previous joint stage.
Obviously, if a 2-agent RL is both transition independent
and reward independent, then it can be solved as two separate
MDPs.
a
Definition 4: An event d j j (s) = (s, a j ) is a triplet that
includes

a joint
state and an action. An event set D j (s) =


∪a j ∈A j s, a j
is a set of events at joint state s.

 


Definition 5: A record  j =
s 0 , a 0j , s 1 , a 1j , . . . is
a sequence that contains a joint state and an action, which
implies that VRA j takes the action at the joint state. Let
symbol  j (t) represent the tth record s t , a tj , and it subject
that s t +1 is outcome state of s t .
Therefore, the transition probability at time t can be
derived by
t,s




j,a j
t
p a j |s, ai = p a j |s =
t,s
j
t

(6)

where t,s
j,a j represents the number of occurrences of event
aj
d j (s) in record  j up to time t and t,s
j represents the number
of occurrences of events of D j (s) in record  j up to time t.

Fig. 2.

5

Neighbor roads of B → C.

t,s
Therefore, t,s
can be derived by
j,a j and  j

t,s
j,a j =
t,s
j =

t −1
k=0
t −1

 a

I  j (k) d j j (s)

(7)



I D j (s)  j (k)

(8)

k=0

where I is an indicator function.
3) Implementation of the MQ Algorithm: To reduce congestion from the system’s perspective, the MQ algorithm is
designed to apply RL to calculate the congestion index of
each road of the network based on collected real-time traffic
condition information. The principle of the MQ algorithm is
that, although the vehicle may not choose the user-optimal
route, it can meet the transportation network traffic expectations, thus mitigating congestion and reducing the overall TT
delay.
Instead of considering equilibrium as necessary, the goal
of the MQ algorithm is to achieve an optimal payoff in the
presence of other VRAs. To overcome the complexity barrier,
for any VRAi , only some VRAs that have the most significant
impact on the VRAi should be considered. We think the
neighboring roads have the most significant impact on road i ,
and its definition is as follows.
NR i (i.e., neighboring roads of road i): Roads that are
close to road i and have a direct impact on road i. Taking
the road B → C in Fig. 2 as an example, NR B→C is {E → B,
A → B, G → B, C → H , C → D, C → F, C → B}. The
traffic condition of road B → C is directly affected by any
of the neighboring roads. Although B → A, B → E, B → G,
F → C, H → C, and D → C are also close to B → C, their
traffic condition cannot directly affect the traffic condition of
B → C, so they are non-neighboring roads. In order to better
describe, we use NRki to represent the kth neighboring road
of road i .
For any VRAi , VRANRi can form a module with VRAi . This
module consists of multiple independent 2-agent RL. Taking
the road B → C in Fig. 2 as an example, the VRA of road
B → C can form a module with the neighboring roads’ VRA.
In this module, the VRA of road B → C and each VRA in
NR B→C forms independent 2-agent RL in turn.
To simplify the presentation, for any road i , the kth neighboring road (NRki ) is represented by symbol j . At time t, not
only the states sit and s tj of VRAi and VRA j can be observed,
but also the information prior to time t can be recorded, such

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

as the best action selection ait −1 , a tj−1 and the reward value
rit −1 of VRAi and VRA j at time t − 1.
Therefore, the best response brit at joint state stt , s tj can
be derived by




brit = max
sit , s tj , ai , a j × pi,t −1
a j | sit , s tj
Q ti,−1
j
j
ai ∈Ai

Fig. 3.

Sixteen different travel trajectories.

Fig. 4.

Network representation.

a j ∈A j

(9)
Q ti, j

can be updated by


Q ti, j sit −1 , s tj−1 , ait −1, a tj−1


= α× rit −1 +γ brit + (1−α)


sit −1 , s tj−1 , ait −1 , a tj−1
×Q ti,−1
j

(10)

where α ∈ (0, 1) is the learning rate and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the
discount factor.
The challenge is coordinating these multiple independent
2-agent RL to obtain the best action ait . The following formula
will demonstrate the procedure.


ait = arg max
Q ti, j sit , s tj , ai , a j
ai ∈Ai

j ∈NRi a j ∈ A j



× pi,t j a j | sit , s tj

(11)

The best action ait is the congestion index of road i at time t.
The congestion index of each road will then be delivered to
the VAs of all the vehicles for determining the optimal routes.
B. A∗ R Algorithm
The detailed process of finding the user-optimal route for
each vehicle is shown in Algorithm 2, where Ft is referred to
as all the vehicles in the network at any time t. The process is
repeated until all the vehicles have reached their destinations.
Algorithm 2 Find the User-Optimal Route for Each Vehicle
Input : Ft , the set of vehicles at any time t in the network;
The congestion index of the network;
Output: The user-optimal routes of all the vehicles.
1: for VA of f ∈ Ft do
2: if f will leave the current road then
3:
Apply the A∗ R algorithm to compute the user-optimal
route of vehicle f
4: end if
5: end for
6: Output the user-optimal routes of all the vehicles
In the field of transportation, there are many studies on
the efficiency and application of the shortest path search
problem. Compared to other shortest path algorithms (such as
the Dijkstra [45] and Floyd [46] algorithm), the advantage of
the A∗ is that it combines a breadth-first search algorithm with
a greedy strategy, which significantly improves the efficiency
of the search. Based on the A∗ algorithm, the heuristic function
is further improved, and the A∗ R algorithm is proposed. In this
subsection, we first introduce the network representation used

in the A∗ R. Then, we introduce the implementation of the
A∗ R. Finally, we will analyze the advantage of the A∗ R
algorithm.
1) Network Representation: The urban transportation network is complex and interdependent, with numerous intersections. For a vehicle traversing the network, the delay on the
intersection is a key factor affecting the TT of the vehicle.
In the most widely used network representation, each intersection is represented by only one node, the direction of travel
between intersections is represented by edges, and the weight
of the edges represents a certain cost, as shown in Fig. 2.
However, it is difficult to represent the 16 different vehicle
travel trajectories, as shown in Fig. 3, within the intersection.
Therefore, we adopted a better network representation to avoid
these problems.
To represent the travel cost within the intersection, we can
expand the intersection node one-to-many according to the
actual construction of the intersection; then, we can add a
virtual edge to represent the sixteen movements in the intersection, whereby the weight of the virtual edge represents the
travel cost of the corresponding movement. As shown on the
left of Fig. 4, node (intersection) i of the original network representation is expanded to 8 nodes (i 1 , i 2 , i 3 , i 4 , i 5 , i 6 , i 7 , i 8 )
in the new network representation, and 16 virtual edges
are added to represent the corresponding movements within
the intersection i . Therefore, after this conversion, the new
network representation of the original transportation network
in Fig. 2 is shown on the right part of Fig. 4.
We use notation  to represent all the nodes in the new
network representation. To indicate the relationship between
the node in the new network representation and the node in
the original network representation, for any node x ∈ ,
O(x) represents the original network’s node whose extension
contains the x node. For example, on the right part of Fig. 4,
O(A1 ) = O(A2 ) = · · · = O(A8 ) = A, and O(B1 ) = O(B2 ) =
· · · = O(B8 ) = B.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

7

In the following subsection, a ’road’ refers to either a virtual
edge or a real edge.
2) Implementation of the A∗ R Algorithm: In the A∗ algorithm, a heuristic function is used to reduce a large number of
invalid searches. Given a current location S and destination D,
for any node x, the estimation function of node x is obtained
by
f (x) = g(x) + h(x)

(12)

where g(x) is the distance function that represents the smallest
TT from the current location S to x, and h(x) is a heuristic
estimate of the TT between x and destination D. In each
step, the node selected for expanding is the node with the
smallest f (x) value, which implies that the node shows the
most promise to reach the destination faster.
The A∗ algorithm is the basic method for solving the
shortest path problem, but we cannot directly use it in high
dynamic traffic, because the TCC’s system-oriented traffic flow
induction strategy may have a conflict with the interests of
individual vehicles. For example, if the TCC guides the vehicle
to change its route, which contains a large number of road
sections that the vehicle has traveled along, then the driver
needs to consider whether it is worth taking this route. The
A∗ algorithm does not take into account the effects of the road
sections that a vehicle has already traveled along. Therefore,
the A∗ algorithm should be further improved.
We think that re-selecting the roads that have already been
traveled along is a waste of road resources. The principle of
the A∗ R algorithm is to add penalties to this behavior. In the
A∗ R algorithm, the notation P represents all the roads that the
vehicle has traveled along, and the notation L(x) represents all
the roads of the shortest route from the current location to the
x node. We use notation R(x) to denote the set of previously
traveled roads contained in L(x); then, R(x) is calculated as
follows:
R(x) = P ∩ L(x)

(13)

We use notation ψ to represent the total time the vehicle
y
spent on the road, and ψx to represent the total time the vehicle
y
spent on road y → x. Then, we define x as follows:
 t

y
ψs + ψts
(14)
x=
∃s∈,
∃t∈,
O(s)=O(y) O(t)=O(x)

Fig. 5.

Principle of A∗ R.

by L(x) = L(y) ∪ {y → x}. Then, the recursive formula of the
R(x) can be obtained from the following equation:
R(x) = P ∩ (L(y) ∪ {y → x})
= (P ∩ L(y)) ∪ (P ∩ {y → x})
= R(y) ∪ (P ∩ {y → x})

The recursive formula of the e(x) functions can be obtained
from the following equation:
g
h

e(x) = FA∗ R ×
g→h∈R(y)∪(P∩{y→x})

= e(y) + FA∗ R ×

g
h

e(x) = FA∗ R ×

(15)

g→h∈R(x)

where FA∗ R is the penalty coefficient of the A∗ R algorithm.
The value of FA∗ R has a large influence on the effect of
the algorithm. If FA∗ R is too small, the A∗ R algorithm will
degenerate into the A∗ algorithm, and the setting of the FA∗ R
value will be discussed in Section IV.
If the x node is extended by the y node through the road
y → x, then the recursive formula of the L(x) can be obtained

y
x

× I P (y → x)

(17)

where I is an indicator function.
Finally, the estimation function f 2 (x) of the A∗ R algorithm
is redefined as
f 2 (x) = g2 (x) + h 2 (x)

(18)

where g2 (x) and h 2 (x) are referred to as the distance function
and the heuristic estimate of the A∗ R algorithm, respectively.
They can be derived by
g2 (x) = g(x) + τ × e(x)

(19)

h 2 (x) = h(x) + (1 − τ ) × e(x)

(20)

where τ ∈ (0, 1); in this paper, τ = 0.5.
Thus, the recursive formula of the g2 (x) can be obtained as
follows:
y

Then, the function e(x) is defined as the total penalty for
calculating the optimal path from the starting node to the x
node, which can be obtained by

(16)

g2 (x) = g(y)+ l x + τ ×(e(y)+ FA∗ R ×
y

= g2 (y)+ l x + τ × FA∗ R ×

y
x × I P (y → x))

y
x × I P (y → x)

(21)

y
lx

where represents the TT of road y → x.
3) Advantage of the A∗ R Algorithm: Fig. 5 shows how the
A∗ R algorithm works. At time t-1, vehicle f 1 departs from the
B6 node, and its destination is the D8 node. According to the
congestion index of all the roads at the time t-1, the optimal
route calculated by vehicle f 1 by the A∗ R algorithm is
path 1 (B6 → A4 → A7 → D1 → D8 ).
Suppose that vehicle f 1 arrives at the A4 node at time t;
thus, P f1 = {B6 → A4 }, where P f1 represent the P of
vehicle f 1 . At the same time, vehicle f 2 departs from the
A4 node at time t, and the destination is also the D8 node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

In addition, for some reason, road A7 → D1 is congested at
time t, so the congestion index of A7 → D1 is very large.
At time t, there are two paths from the current position (A4 )
to the D8 node, i.e., path 2 (A4 → A7 → D1 → D8 ) and
path 3 (A4 → A8 → B2 → B7 → C1 → C6 → D4 → D8 ).
For vehicle f 2 , P f2 = {}, so which path to choose just
depends on which path is shorter, that is, the total congestion
index of the path is the smallest. Because the congestion index
of A7 → D1 is very large, the vehicle f 2 will select the path 3
as long as the congestion index of the path 2 is sufficiently
large.
For vehicle f 1 , P f1 = {B6 → A4 } and O(B6 ) = O(B2 ) =
B and O(A4 ) = O(A8 ) = A; therefore, BA28 = AB82 =
B6
B6
A4 = ψ A4 >0. If vehicle f 1 chooses path 3 , because path 3
contains road A8 → B2 , vehicle f 1 must suffer not only the
total congestion index of path 3 but also the penalty of road
A8 → B2 . Therefore, vehicle f 1 will select path 2 as long as
the penalty of road A8 → B2 is sufficiently large.
As we all know, many route guidance methods may lead
to inevitable congestion by providing the same alternative for
multiple vehicles while congestion occurs. From this small
example, we see that the A∗ R algorithm avoids choosing the
roads that have been traveled along by imposing penalties on
them. Therefore, even if the vehicles have the same current
location and destination, as long as the roads they have traveled
along are different, the A∗ R algorithm can provide different
routes for these vehicles.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we investigate the performance of the
A∗ R2 method under various traffic scenarios, and the results
are compared with those of other established methods. The
specific research questions we are trying to answer in this
section are as follows:
• How do parameters (time interval σ , penalty coefficient
FA∗ R , optimal flow coefficient FO F ) influence the performance of the proposed method under various traffic
scenarios?
• What is the performance from the user’s perspective
under various scenarios (i.e., minimize TT and TD)?
• What is the performance from the system’s perspective
under various scenarios (i.e., mitigating congestion)?
• Is the system still robust at low compliance rates
(i.e., many drivers are not fully compliant with the route
guidance)?
The following subsections will focus on answering the
above questions. We start with an assumption of a 100% compliance rate, i.e., all vehicles follow the routes provided by the
route guidance method completely. However, the assumption
will be relaxed later to study the robustness of the system at
low compliance rates.
A. Experiment Setup
The VANET Simulator is used to model the movement of
vehicles in the transportation network. The VANET Simulator
is an open-source simulator for microsimulation that supports
easy adaptation and extension of features. Each vehicle in

Fig. 6.
China.

Yizhuang economic and technological development zone, Beijing,

TABLE III
ATTRIBUTE VALUES OF THE T WO ROAD T YPES

VANET is simulated individually and makes decisions on its
own. Hence, VANET is appropriate for use in our study.
1) The Transportation Network: First, we introduce the
transportation network we used in this study.
The real-world transportation network of the Yizhuang
economic and technological development zone of Beijing,
China, is used as our experiment network (shown in Fig. 6).
The dataset provides the topology of the road network and
information about the lanes, lengths, gradients, and speed
limits. To simplify our experiment, all roads are set to be
bidirectional, and all roads are divided into two types: the main
road and secondary road (the thicker lines in Fig. 6 represents
the main roads, and the thinner lines represents the secondary
roads); furthermore, the same types of roads have the same
attribute values except for the length. The associated attribute
(defined in TABLE I ) values of the two road types are shown
in TABLE III.
2) Methods for Comparison: The A∗ R2 method is compared with four different route guidance methods: the shortest
path (SP) algorithm, dynamic shortest path (DSP) algorithm,
dynamic random k shortest path (DRkSP) algorithm, and DTA
algorithm.
The SP algorithm will simply calculate the shortest TT route
from the origin to destination for each vehicle based on the
speed limit. It does not take into account the traffic information
and does not provide the re-routing function during the trip.
The DSP is a classical dynamic route guidance method
that computes the shortest path based on real-time traffic
information about the road network. The advantage of DSP
is its simplicity. The service periodically collects real-time
traffic condition and then assigns to each vehicle a new
current shortest time path. The drawback of DSP is that it
only considers the current traffic condition when performing
rerouting and does not take into account the road sections

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

9

TABLE IV
K EY PARAMETERS OF A∗ R2

Fig. 7.

Traffic scenarios.

on which the car has already traveled. Thus, it is possible to
generate new congestion or make detours.
The DRkSP is another classical dynamic route guidance
method based on the real-time TT on the road network.
It assigns each vehicle to one of the k paths randomly to
balance the traffic. In our experiment, to prevent situations
in which there is a huge difference between the ’best’ path
and ’worst’ path, we set the limit for the difference between
the length of the best path and the worst path as 20%.
Thus, the DRkSP method achieves a compromise between the
system’s perspective and the user’s perspective to a certain
extent. A fair comparison can therefore be made between it
and our A∗ R2 method.
In the field of traffic assignment and optimization, DTA
models are widely used. The current research on the
DTA algorithm can be broadly divided into two categories:
simulation-based methods and analytical methods. In this
study, simulation-based DTA deployed in [47] was used to
achieve user equilibrium through an iterative simulation.
The results of these methods (except those of the SP
algorithm) were averaged over 10 simulation runs to take into
account the stochastic nature of the simulation.
3) Traffic Scenarios: In order to study whether the A∗ R2
method has adaptive ability for different traffic scenarios,
we designed several traffic scenarios with different demand
patterns.
As shown in Fig. 7, we have five traffic scenarios with
different demand patterns. All the information in the OD

set (departure time, origin, destination, etc. of each vehicle)
is randomly generated according to the different demand
patterns, and all traffic is evenly generated during the first
5 minutes. In traffic scenario (a), the origin and destination of
all vehicles are evenly distributed throughout the road network.
In traffic scenario (b), if the origin of a vehicle is on the left
part of the road network, its destination will be on the right
part of the road network. Conversely, if the origin is on the
right part of the road network, its destination will be on the left
part of the road network. In traffic scenario (c), if the origin
of a vehicle is on the upper left part of the road network, its
destination will be on the lower right part of the road network.
Conversely, if the origin is on the lower right part of the road
network, its destination will be on the upper left part of the
road network. In traffic scenario (d), the origin of a vehicle will
only be on the left part of the road network, and its destination
will only be on the right part of the road network. In traffic
scenario (e), the origin of a vehicle will only be on the upper
left part of the road network, and its destination will only be
on the lower right part of the road network.
B. Optimal Values of Parameters
TABLE IV lists the key parameters involved in the A∗ R2
method, i.e., the time interval σ , penalty coefficient FA∗ R , and
optimal flow coefficient FO F . These three parameters have a
significant impact on the performance of the A∗ R2 method.
We conducted several experiments to determine the optimal
setting of the parameters. For simplicity, the experimental
processes of σ and FA∗ R are not described in detail. In the
following experiments, we set σ and FA∗ R as 20s and 2,
respectively. This is because when σ and FA∗ R are set to these
two values, good results can be achieved under various traffic
scenarios.
In traffic scenario (b), we design a variety of OD sets,
then set different values for FO F , and calculates the average
TT and average TD of all the vehicles. As shown in Fig. 8,
the results of the average TT and average TD of 2000, 4000,
and 6000 vehicles are given.
For a small number of vehicles, the average TT and TD
first decrease with an increase in FO F ; then, they tend to
remain constant. This is because when the value of FO F is
too small, the transportation network is easily considered to
be congested, and the A∗ R2 method will guide the vehicle
toward routes that are not optimal, resulting in an increase
in the TT and TD. When the FO F value is FO∗ F , because the
number of vehicles is relatively small, most roads cannot meet
the congestion conditions prescribed by the A∗ R2 method;
therefore, most vehicles will still choose the optimal route.
When FO F > FO∗ F , most of roads are hard considered to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 9.

Average TTs for different traffic scenarios.

Fig. 8. Average TTs and TDs for different FO F . (a) veh=2000. (b) veh=4000.
(c) veh=6000.

be congested; therefore, the average TT and TD tend remain
constant. When the number of vehicles is 2000, FO∗ F ≥8.
In the case of a moderate number of vehicles, the average
TT of the vehicle decreases rapidly before an increase in
FO F to FO∗ F ; then, it increases slowly with an increase in
FO F . This is because when FO F reaches a certain value,
it improves the criteria for judging road congestion. However,
when FO F > FO∗ F , because of the relatively large traffic flow
on some roads, congestion actually occurs in the transportation
network. When the number of vehicles is 4000, FO∗ F = 12.
In the case of a large number of vehicles, the traffic flow of
the entire transportation network is very large, so FO∗ F must
be very large, and the average TT has a higher value before
FO F increases to FO∗ F , for a small FO F will lead to a greater
probability of road congestion. When FO F >FO∗ F , it is easy
to generate actual congestion, and the average TT increases
rapidly. When the number of vehicles is 6000, FO∗ F = 20.
C. TT and TD
To verify the performance of the A∗ R2 method in reducing
the TT, we compare the A∗ R2 method with DSP, DRkSP, and
DTA under different scenarios. In these five traffic scenarios,
the size of OD is set to 5000, i.e., the number of vehicles
is 5000. As shown in Fig. 9, the A∗ R2 method can reduce
the average TT of the vehicles to varying degrees regardless
of the traffic scenarios because it can obtain better strategies
through RL. The DSP method can dynamically update the
driving path according to real-time traffic conditions. However,
it ignores the impact of the road sections that the car has
already traveled along and the future impact of the current
rerouting. Therefore, it has a poor performance in some traffic
scenarios. Under most traffic scenarios, the average TT of all
the methods satisfied DSP>DRkSP>DTA>A∗ R2 . This shows
that the A∗ R2 method has a strong adaptive ability for different
traffic scenarios.
In addition, we also studied the winners and losers in traffic
scenario (b), that is, how much time each vehicle saved or
wasted against the results of the SP method. We used negative

Fig. 10. Winners and losers compared against the results of the SP method.
TS01 = [−300, −200), TS02 = [−200, −100), TSX = (−400 + X ∗ 100,
−300 + X ∗ 100), . . . , TS13 = [900, 1000).

Fig. 11.

Average TDs for different traffic densities.

numbers to represent the time wasted and positive numbers
to indicate time saved. The results are shown in Fig. 10,
which is a histogram, where the horizontal axis represents
time segmentation, the vertical axis represents the number of
corresponding vehicles, and the dashed vertical line indicates
the separation between the time wasted and time saved.
The average TT and average TD are the key indicators
for evaluating the route guidance method. Fig. 11 shows a
comparison of the TDs of A∗ R2 with those of SP, DSP,
DRkSP, and DTA under different traffic scenarios. The SP
algorithm plans the shortest path for all vehicles according
to the maximum speed limit, and the path does not change;
therefore, the average TD is the smallest. Under most traffic
scenarios, the TD of DSP is the largest because only the
current state of the transportation network is considered in
path planning, regardless of the road sections that the vehicle
has already traveled along, which causes the state of the
transportation network to oscillate. The DRkSP avoids the
shortcomings of the DSP algorithm by randomly selecting
multiple routes. The A∗ R2 method considers the penalty for
the roads that the vehicle has traveled along, avoiding their
re-selection, thus significantly reducing the average TD.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

Fig. 13.

Fig. 12.

The number of congested roads detected every 120s.

The experimental results reveal that the A∗ R2 method
has a strong adaptive ability for different traffic scenarios.
Thus, the A∗ R2 can increase travel efficiency from the user’s
perspective under all kinds of traffic scenarios.
D. Traffic Congestion
The objective of the A∗ R2 method is to balance the traffic
flow on all roads of the network to improve the utilization of
road resources and reduce the number of congested roads.
As shown in Fig. 12, by detecting the number of congested
roads in the network every 120 s, we have obtained the ability
to alleviate the traffic network congestion in traffic scenario
(b) with all methods; the size of the OD set is 5000. As shown
in Fig. 12, the SP method cannot dynamically adjust the
path selection, the number of congested roads is quite high,
and the downward trend is very slow. The DSP and DTA
algorithms have the ability of re-route the path; therefore, they
perform better than the SP algorithm. The A∗ R2 method has
a higher congestion number than the DTA method in the early
period, but because of its adaptive learning ability, its ability
to mitigate traffic congestion in the middle and late period
is greater than that of the DTA method. This shows that the
A∗ R2 method can increase traffic efficiency from a system’s
perspective.

11

Average TT varies with the compliance rate.

the average TT. This is because, as long as there are still
vehicles that are compliant with the route guidance methods,
there will be vehicles that not only use the better route, but
also give way to other vehicles.
Regardless of the compliance rate, the A∗ R2 method has
the best performance among the tested methods. This is
because the A∗ R2 method can adaptively adjust the congestion
index so that the compliant vehicles avoid competing with
the non-compliant vehicles for road resources. The compliant
vehicles are therefore able to use better routes and reduce the
likelihood of congestion.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed an urban traffic route
guidance method with a high adaptive learning ability and
demonstrated its ability to reduce congestion, TT, and TD
under diverse traffic scenarios (A∗ R2 ). The A∗ R2 method
adopts the MQ algorithm to assess real-time traffic conditions from the system’s perspective based on real-time traffic
information. Then, the A∗ R algorithm is used to search for
the optimal route from the user’s perspective. The process is
repeated periodically during each user’s journey.
In future research, we will incorporate the effects of traffic
signals on traffic conditions in the network and integrate them
into the route guidance system to further improve the method’s
performance.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

E. Performance at Different Compliance Rates
In this study, we assume that all vehicles are fully compliant
with the route guidance methods, but it is unrealistic, because
not all vehicles in real life will install route guidance systems;
furthermore, some users will not accept routes that do not meet
their preferences. The compliance rate is a key factor that must
be considered in the design of all dynamic route guidance
methods. In this paper, the x% compliance rate indicates that,
in each iteration, the probability that each vehicle participates
in the new route calculation (perhaps the new route is the
same as the original route) is x%; therefore, the probability
of continuing to travel along the original route is 1-x%.
In scenario (b), and the size of OD set is 5000, by changing the
compliance rate, we measure the average vehicle’s TT as an
indicator of the performance of each route guidance method.
Fig. 13 indicates that, even under low compliance rates, all
the methods except the SP method can significantly improve

This work was supported in part by the Zhejiang University/University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Institute, and
was led by Principal Supervisors Wenbin Hu and Simon Hu.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. Angelelli, I. Arsik, V. Morandi, M. Savelsbergh, and M. G. Speranza,
“Proactive route guidance to avoid congestion,” Transp. Res. B,
Methodol., vol. 94, pp. 1–21, Dec. 2016.
[2] Z. Cao, S. Jiang, J. Zhang, and H. Guo, “A unified framework for vehicle
rerouting and traffic light control to reduce traffic congestion,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1958–1973, Jul. 2017.
[3] S. Wang, S. Djahel, Z. Zhang, and J. Mcmanis, “Next road rerouting:
A multiagent system for mitigating unexpected urban traffic congestion,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2888–2899,
Oct. 2016.
[4] J. Pan, I. S. Popa, and C. Borcea, “DIVERT: A distributed vehicular
traffic re-routing system for congestion avoidance,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 58–72, Jan. 2017.
[5] B. Y. Chen, W. H. K. Lam, and Q. Li, “Efficient solution algorithm
for finding spatially dependent reliable shortest path in road networks,”
J. Adv. Transp., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1413–1431, Sep. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[6] I. Kaparias, M. G. H. Bell, K. Bogenberger, and Y. Chen, “Approach
to time dependence and reliability in dynamic route guidance,” Transp.
Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board, vol. 2039, no. 1, pp. 32–41, Jan. 2007.
[7] U. Demiryurek, F. Banaei-Kashani, C. Shahabi, and A. Ranganathan,
“Online computation of fastest path in time-dependent spatial networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Spatial Temporal Databases. Springer, 2011,
pp. 92–111.
[8] B. Y. Chen, W. H. K. Lam, A. Sumalee, Q. Li, H. Shao, and Z. Fang,
“Finding reliable shortest paths in road networks under uncertainty,”
Netw. Spatial Econ., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 123–148, May 2012.
[9] U. Atila, I. R. Karas, C. Gologlu, B. Yaman, and I. M. Orak, “Design
of a route guidance system with shortest driving time based on genetic
algorithm,” in Proc. 10th WSEAS Int. Conf. Appl. Comput. Appl.
Comput. Sci. (ACACOS), Stevens Point, WI, USA: World Scientific and
Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS), 2011, pp. 61–66.
[10] Y. Gong, J. Zhang, O. Liu, R. Huang, H. S. Chung, and Y. Shi,
“Optimizing the vehicle routing problem with time windows: A discrete
particle swarm optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.
C, Appl. Rev., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 254–267, Mar. 2012.
[11] I. C. Lin and S. Y. Chou, “Developing adaptive driving route guidance
systems based on fuzzy neural network,” in Proc. IET 4th Int. Conf.
Intell. Environ., 2008.
[12] R. Balakrishna, M. Ben-Akiva, J. Bottom, and S. Gao, “Information
impacts on traveler behavior and network performance: State of knowledge and future directions,” in Proc. Adv. Dyn. Netw. Model. Complex
Transp. Syst. Springer, 2013, pp. 193–224.
[13] Z. Zhao, W. Chen, X. Wu, P. C. Y. Chen, and J. Liu, “LSTM network:
A deep learning approach for short-term traffic forecast,” IET Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 68–75, Mar. 2017.
[14] E. I. Vlahogianni, M. G. Karlaftis, and J. C. Golias, “Short-term traffic
forecasting: Where we are and where we’re going,” Transp. Res. C,
Emerg. Technol., vol. 43, pp. 3–19, Jun. 2014.
[15] I. L. Aurrecoechea, “Design and validation of novel methods for longterm road traffic forecasting,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universidad del País
Vasco-Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, Leioa, Spain, 2018.
[16] Z. Hou and X. Li, “Repeatability and similarity of freeway traffic flow
and long-term prediction under big data,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1786–1796, Jun. 2016.
[17] Z. Liang and Y. Wakahara, “City traffic prediction based on real-time
traffic information for intelligent transport systems,” in Proc. 13th Int.
Conf. ITS Telecommun. (ITST), Nov. 2013, pp. 378–383.
[18] H. Markovič, B. D. Bašic, H. Gold, F. Dong, and K. Hirota, “GPS
data-based non-parametric regression for predicting travel times in urban
traffic networks,” PROMET-Traffic Transp., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
Jan. 2012.
[19] A. Abadi, T. Rajabioun, and P. A. Ioannou, “Traffic flow prediction
for road transportation networks with limited traffic data,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 653–662, Aug. 2014.
[20] H.-K. Chen and C.-F. Hsueh, “A model and an algorithm for the dynamic
user-optimal route choice problem,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 219–234, Apr. 1998.
[21] D. P. Watling, T. K. Rasmussen, C. G. Prato, and O. A. Nielsen,
“Stochastic user equilibrium with a bounded choice model,” Transp.
Res. B, Methodol., vol. 114, pp. 254–280, Aug. 2018.
[22] S. Aiko, P. Thaithatkul, and Y. Asakura, “Incorporating user preference
into optimal vehicle routing problem of integrated sharing transport
system,” Asian Transp. Stud., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 98–116, 2018.
[23] S. Lafortune, R. Sengupta, D. E. Kaufman, and R. L. Smith, “Dynamic
system-optimal traffic assignment using a state space model,” Transp.
Res. B, Methodol., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 451–472, Dec. 1993.
[24] N. Groot, B. De Schutter, and H. Hellendoorn, “Toward system-optimal
routing in traffic networks: A reverse stackelberg game approach,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 29–40, Feb. 2015.
[25] S. Samaranayake, W. Krichene, J. Reilly, M. L. D. Monache, P. Goatin,
and A. Bayen, “Discrete-time system optimal dynamic traffic assignment
(SO-DTA) with partial control for physical queuing networks,” Transp.
Sci., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 982–1001, Aug. 2018.
[26] L. Yan, W. Hu, and H. Wang, “Dynamic real-time algorithm for multiintersection route selection in urban traffic networks,” J. Softw., vol. 27,
no. 9, pp. 2199–2217, 2016.
[27] Z. Cao, H. Guo, and J. Zhang, “A multiagent-based approach for vehicle
routing by considering both arriving on time and total travel time,” ACM
Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1–21, Dec. 2017.
[28] Z. Cao, H. Guo, J. Zhang, and U. Fastenrath, “Multiagent-based route
guidance for increasing the chance of arrival on time,” in Proc. 13th
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016, pp. 3814–3820.

[29] T. Yamashita, K. Izumi, K. Kurumatani, and H. Nakashima, “Smooth
traffic flow with a cooperative car navigation system,” in Proc. 4th Int.
Joint Conf. Auto. Agents Multiagent Syst. (AAMAS), 2005, pp. 478–485.
[30] R. Kim, H. Lim, and B. Krishnamachari, “Prefetching-based data
dissemination in vehicular cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 292–306, Jan. 2016.
[31] Y. Cao, Z. Sun, N. Wang, M. Riaz, H. Cruickshank, and X. Liu,
“Geographic-based spray-and-relay (GSaR): An efficient routing scheme
for DTNs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1548–1564,
Apr. 2015.
[32] F. Khodadadi, S. J. Mirabedini, and A. Harounabadi, “Improve traffic
management in the vehicular ad hoc networks by combining ant colony
algorithm and fuzzy system,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 44–53, 2016.
[33] A. Jahangiri and H. A. Rakha, “Applying machine learning techniques to
transportation mode recognition using mobile phone sensor data,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2406–2417, Oct. 2015.
[34] R. F. Atallah, C. M. Assi, and J. Y. Yu, “A reinforcement learning technique for optimizing downlink scheduling in an energy-limited vehicular
network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 4592–4601,
Jun. 2017.
[35] M. Seshadri, Z. Cao, H. Guo, J. Zhang, and U. Fastenrath, “Multiagentbased cooperative vehicle routing using node pressure and auctions,”
in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Oct. 2017,
pp. 1–7.
[36] S. El-Tantawy, B. Abdulhai, and H. Abdelgawad, “Multiagent reinforcement learning for integrated network of adaptive traffic signal
controllers (MARLIN-ATSC): Methodology and large-scale application
on downtown toronto,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 1140–1150, Sep. 2013.
[37] M. Wiering, J. Vreeken, J. van Veenen, and A. Koopman, “Simulation
and optimization of traffic in a city,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp.,
Jun. 2004, pp. 453–458.
[38] B. Zhao, C. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Real-time traffic light scheduling algorithm based on genetic algorithm and machine learning,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Internet Vehicles. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015,
pp. 385–398.
[39] A. Sadek and N. Basha, “Self-learning intelligent agents for dynamic
traffic routing on transportation networks,” in Unifying Themes in
Complex Systems, A. Minai, D. Braha, and Y. Bar-Yam, Eds. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2010.
[40] M. Z. Arokhlo, A. Selamat, S. Z. M. Hashim, and M. H. Selamat, “Route
guidance system using multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Asia, Jul. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[41] M. Zolfpour-Arokhlo, A. Selamat, S. Z. M. Hashim, and H. Afkhami,
“Modeling of route planning system based on q value-based dynamic
programming with multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms,” Eng.
Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 29, pp. 163–177, Mar. 2014.
[42] Y. Chiu, J. Bottom, M. Mahut, A. Paz, R. Balakrishna, T. Waller, and
J. Hicks, Dynamic Traffic Assignment: A Primer. Washington, DC, USA:
Transportation Research Board, 2011, p. 52.
[43] M. E. Ben-Akiva, S. Gao, Z. Wei, and Y. Wen, “A dynamic traffic
assignment model for highly congested urban networks,” Transp. Res.
C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 24, pp. 62–82, Oct. 2012.
[44] C. Gawron, “Simulation-based traffic assignment: Computing user equilibria in large street networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Math. Natural
Sci., Univ. Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 1999.
[45] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
Numerische Math., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 269–271, Dec. 1959.
[46] D. Wei, “An optimized floyd algorithm for the shortest path problem,”
J. Netw., vol. 5, no. 12, p. 1496, Dec. 2010.
[47] J. Pan, I. S. Popa, K. Zeitouni, and C. Borcea, “Proactive vehicular traffic
rerouting for lower travel time,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62,
no. 8, pp. 3551–3568, Oct. 2013.

Chuanhui Tang is currently a Graduate Student
with the School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China. His research interests include intelligent transport systems, optimization and scheduling, and uncertainty artificial
intelligence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TANG et al.: URBAN TRAFFIC ROUTE GUIDANCE METHOD WITH HIGH ADAPTIVE LEARNING ABILITY

Wenbin Hu is currently a Professor with the School
of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. His research interests include intelligent
transport systems, data mining and big data, uncertainty artificial intelligence, and complex networks.
He has authored or corresponding authored over
60 refereed journal articles and conference papers,
such as the IEEE TKDE, the IEEE TMC, ACM
TKDD, SigKDD, ICDM, AAAI, and IJCAI in these
areas.

13

Marc E. J. Stettler is currently a Senior Lecturer with the Centre for Transport Studies, Imperial
College London. His main research interests are in
intelligent transport systems, vehicle emissions measurement and modeling, and environmental impacts
of freight transport.

Simon Hu is currently an Assistant Professor
with the ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China. He is also an Honorary Research
Fellow with Imperial College London. His research
interests lie in transport telematics, traffic simulation
modeling, dynamic route guidance systems, traffic
management, and data fusion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Auckland University of Technology. Downloaded on June 05,2020 at 17:00:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

