Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-025-05842-8

Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based on cloud-edge
computing for urban vehicle route guidance
Zhuhua Liao1,2 · Junjian Gao1 · Aiping Yi1 · Yijiang Zhao1 · Yue Tang1
Received: 16 April 2025 / Revised: 11 October 2025 / Accepted: 29 October 2025 / Published online: 11 November 2025
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025

Abstract
Urban traffic congestion has emerged as a significant challenge impairing travel efficiency and transportation resource
utilization. Although vehicle route guidance plays a crucial role in mitigating urban traffic congestion, traditional methods
fail to accurately assess the spatiotemporal traffic patterns and adapt swiftly to dynamic traffic conditions and vehicular
interactions. To address the issues, this paper proposes a Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning framework based
on cloud-edge computing for urban vehicle route guidance. The framework deploys intersection-based agents to collect
realtime traffic data, facilitate global deep reinforcement learning, and offer intelligent and interactive route guidance.
Moreover, an accurately spatiotemporal traffic state information mining method is proposed by integrating Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and Gated Recurrent Unit network (GRU) with an attention mechanism. Subsequently, a modeling approach for inter-agent spatial relationship based on Graph Attention Network (GAT) is presented to facilitate the
transmission and fusion of traffic characteristics on cloud. Finally, the Spatio-Temporal Mean-Field multi-agent Dueling
Q-Routing (ST-MF-DQR) algorithm is proposed to optimize vehicular spatiotemporal coordination. The experimental
evaluations on both synthetic and real traffic networks demonstrate that our method minimizes average vehicle waiting
and travel times, significantly improving urban traffic mobility.
Keywords Urban route guidance · Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning · Graph neural network · Dueling
Q-routing · Cloud-edge computing

1 Introduction

Aiping Yi
apyi@hnust.edu.cn
Zhuhua Liao
zhliao@hnust.edu.cn
Junjian Gao
junjiangao@mail.hnust.edu.cn
Yijiang Zhao
zhaoyj@hnust.edu.cn
Yue Tang
2205060420@mail.hnust.edu.cn
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201,
Hunan, China

2

Intelligent Connected Vehicle Software Design and Service
of Hunan Engineering Research Center, Xiangtan 411201,
Hunan, China

The continuous increase in urban vehicle numbers has led
to frequent and unpredictable traffic congestion, posing a
significant social challenge for modern cities [1]. This not
only impacts the economic efficiency and environmental
quality of urban areas but also diminishes the effectiveness
and experience of people’s travel [2]. However, owing to
the long-term evolutionary trend of transportation networks
and the inherent spatiotemporal variations in traffic flow [3],
vehicle route guidance has become a critical component of
the Intelligent Transportation System (ITS). It can dynamically adjust driving routes based on real-time traffic conditions and provides users with optimal or suboptimal travel
plans. Today, it is considered the most practical and effective approach to balancing urban traffic flow and alleviating
road congestion [4, 5]. In recent years, intelligent transportation systems have utilized advanced communication technology to achieve real-time information exchange among
vehicles, infrastructure, and management centers [6, 7].

13

17 Page 2 of 17

This enables real-time information processing and sharing
capabilities for distributed vehicle route guidance methods.
But distributed vehicle route guidance demands large-scale
state perception and predictive analysis of critical locations,
which will entail quantitatively-intensive and time-sensitive
computing. Cloud-edge computing can effectively shorten
the transmission distance, reduce the transmission delay,
and meet the needs of large-scale urban vehicle guidance
[8]. Furthermore, currently many researchers are employing Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) to address the
issue of the route guidance for every vehicle by utilizing
vehicles, or within a certain range of vehicles by utilizing
road network nodes as agents to make decisions based on
real-time traffic information exchange [9–11]. However,
providing macroscopic or microscopic route guidance and
utilizing vehicle-mounted or roadside sensing devices will
introduce different complexities and challenges to the system. The microscopic route guidance and vehicle-mounted
sensing information can guide route anytime and anywhere
in transportation networks, but it will impose increased
computational burden on vehicles, complicated changes for
agents, and challenges in cooperation between agents. On
the other hand, the macroscopic route guidance and roadside sensing information simplifies the number of agents
and algorithm complexity. This is because the number of
intersections is much smaller than that of vehicles, and the
amount of data that needs to be perceived and processed
is much less than the microscopic approach. But there are
still challenges to ensuring effective guidance. In short, the
current methods mainly face the following challenges: (1)
existing route guidance methods based on traffic prediction
[12] struggle with accurately predicting real-time routes due
to the randomness of traffic and unpredictability of participants; (2) Although agents can learn optimal strategies [13]
and obtain real-time traffic information through continuous
interaction with the environment, they tend to overlook the
global spatiotemporal correlations of traffic information in
the complex urban road network; (3) current traffic participants mainly take into account the current traffic conditions
when directing the fastest or shortest routes, leading to a
high volume of vehicles on these routes and creating new
congestion issues. To address these challenges, it is essential
to reasonably consider the interaction between vehicles and
then coordinate their movements or steering decisions [14].
Nevertheless, as the number of vehicles in the road network
increases, modeling interactions among a large number of
moving vehicles becomes challenging, posing significant
difficulties in optimizing route guidance strategies for every
individual vehicle.
In this paper, we explore the distributed intelligent route
guidance scheme for urban road networks in a cloud-edge
computing environment, aiming to optimize traffic flow

13

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

distribution at intersections and improve overall traffic efficiency. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning framework based on cloud-edge computing is proposed for
urban vehicle route guidance. The framework employs
intersection-deployed roadside units and cloud-edge
collaborating network to facilitate city-wide deep reinforcement learning, and establishes an intelligent interactive guidance model that reconciles vehicle-specific
travel needs with both local and global traffic flow
optimization.
2. A method for extracting spatiotemporal characteristics and state information from urban traffic networks
by integrating Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN)
and Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with an attention
mechanism. Furthermore, a spatial relationship modeling approach for intersection agents is introduced,
leveraging Graph Attention Network (GAT) to enhance
the transmission and fusion of spatiotemporal traffic
features.
3. A mean field theory - based computational method and a
spatiotemporal multi-agent dueling Q-routing (ST-MFDQR) algorithm are developed based on the average
actions of neighboring vehicles, enabling intersection
agents to model vehicle interactions and coordinate
movements across space and time.
The proposed framework and methods are experimentally
validated through simulated and real urban traffic environments. And a comparison was conducted against popular
baseline methods for demonstrating the effectiveness of the
framework and methods presented in this paper.

2 Related work
Early research on vehicle route planning primarily focused
on finding the optimal route for source-destination pairs on
static road networks [15]. However, in real-world environments, traffic dynamics exhibit significant spatiotemporal
characteristics, making algorithms designed for static road
networks less applicable to dynamic networks. Some studies have proposed solutions that account for the long-term
evolution [3] of the road network and the Out-of- Distribution scenarios, aiming to extend the validity period and
area of deep learning-based traffic predicting results [16].
Other studies dynamically plan routes for vehicles based on
real-time traffic conditions. For example, Chen et al. [17]
proposed a route navigation algorithm based on global traffic information, enabling dynamic, optimal, and diversified
route choices. In recent years, there has been a growing

Page 3 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

interest in prediction-based route planning, where researchers are developing methods to plan vehicle routes by predicting traffic flow distribution across the network. Liebig
et al. [18] utilized Gaussian process regression to estimate
traffic flow in areas with low sensor coverage and proposed
a dynamic global route planning method based on real-time
traffic prediction. Zhu et al. [19] introduced a predictionbased route guidance method that effectively controls and
reduces traffic congestion by evaluating congestion types
and predicting congestion duration. However, these methods are based on predictions of short-term stability in traffic,
but in fact urban traffic is inherently stochastic and highly
uncertain. Therefore, although the route guidance avoids
traffic congestion with re-routing during the trip, it may still
offer non-optimal routing. As a result, the guidance strategy should be updated adaptively in order to enhance its
reliability.
Deep reinforcement learning, as a model-free approach,
is not only used in vehicle path planning [4], but also widely
applied to vehicle route guidance that requires consideration
of various vehicle positions and real-time traffic conditions,
as well as more complex interactions. For example, Mao
et al. [9] designed a Q-learning-based reinforcement learning (RL) framework for adaptive route guidance in stochastic time-varying networks, utilizing tree-based function
approximation methods to improve algorithm efficiency
and accuracy. Koh et al. [20] suggested employing a deep
Q learning algorithm (or DQN) to address the challenges
posed by high-dimensional state and action spaces in order
to improve route guidance. Therefore, DQN has been
widely concerned. For instance, Dmitry Mukhutdinov et
al. [21] introducing a DQN-routing method. It models the
routing problem as a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning problem and utilizes deep neural networks to acquire
appropriate value estimation functions, enabling a routing
node to perform optimal packet forwarding. Nevertheless,
these methods primarily focus on single-agent reinforcement learning and their scalability is limited. And they
also ignore the influence of global spatiotemporal feature
information on local decision making in large space. Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) holds significant
application value in vehicle route guidance by enabling
multiple vehicle agents to achieve global system optimization through collaborative learning. Tang et al. [22] introduced an A∗R2 urban traffic route guidance method based
on multi-agent reinforcement learning, showcasing its high
adaptive learning capability. Arasteh et al. [10] designed a
multi-agent reinforcement learning method based on GAT
and Q-routing algorithm (short for GA-DQ-routing) to assist
vehicles in route guidance. Lin et al. [23] proposed an edge
intelligence-based vehicular network architecture to support real-time vehicle routing decisions through distributed

multi-agent reinforcement learning models. Shou et al. [24]
transformed the route selection behavior of agents (such
as autonomous vehicles or intelligent navigation systems)
and the system equilibrium process in traffic networks into
a Markov routing game (MRG) problem, and designed a
mean-field-based multi-agent deep Q-learning method to
capture competition among agents. While these methods
have demonstrated significant advantages of multi-agent
reinforcement learning in urban traffic route guidance, they
overlook the precise and efficient extraction of spatiotemporal features in dynamic traffic networks and the consideration of interactions between vehicles, leading to decreased
system efficiency and significant resource wastage.
In addition, numerous recent studies have focused on
intelligent traffic light control at traffic intersections, which
significantly contributes to reducing urban vehicle waiting times and enhancing travel efficiency. Many of these
methods are based on multi-agent reinforcement learning,
including intelligent traffic light control and multi-intelligent traffic light collaborative control [25–27]. However,
these intelligent traffic light control approaches do not
directly provide personalized route planning or guidance
for vehicles and effectively to utilize real-time global traffic
flow information to reroute vehicles.
In summary, although current research on vehicle route
guidance in urban areas has provided some solutions, there
remain persisting issues in global spatiotemporal relationship extraction, guidance performance and efficiency, for
city-based vehicle routing guidance, which need to be further studied. Therefore, this paper proposes a traffic intersection-based multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
method based on cloud-edge computing for urban vehicle
route guidance. This approach aims to effectively extract
spatiotemporal features in dynamic traffic networks and
capture interactions between vehicles, ultimately achieving
spatiotemporal coordination among vehicles in urban environments and improving the efficiency of urban traffic.

3 System model
3.1 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
framework
For addressing issues related to the quality and responsiveness of urban vehicle route guidance, we propose a traffic intersection-based multi-agent reinforcement learning
framework using cloud-edge computing, as shown in Fig. 1.
This framework is specifically designed for multi-intersection areas and involves vehicles, roadside units and cloud
servers. The cloud server serves as the central device for
storing and processing global traffic perception information,

13

17 Page 4 of 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

Fig. 1 The multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning framework
based on cloud-edge computing

while regional spatiotemporal traffic features and individual
vehicle actions are processed by the roadside units. Furthermore, roadside units, serving as edge computing and communication devices, also function as agents and execute
deep reinforcement learning algorithms based on eventdriven reinforcement learning concepts [28]. These agents
perceive traffic intersection information and exchange
information with other units or the cloud server, and provide route guidance services for vehicles in the local area
upon receiving route guidance requests from vehicles, for
instance, recommending the optimal exit direction (straight,
left turn, or right turn) for vehicles about to leave the traffic
intersection.
Based on the existing urban traffic characteristics and the
framework proposed in this paper, the following definitions
are provided to better describe road conditions:
Definition 1 Traffic Congestion Index (TCI): The TCI is
used to assess road traffic conditions by taking into account
both the average vehicle speed and vehicle density on the

13

road. This index offers a comprehensive evaluation of traffic
congestion [19]:
S e (t) = 1 −
De (t) =

V e (t)
M Se

Ne (t)
M Ce





T CI e (t) = w1 · S e (t) + w2 · De (t) 

(1)
(2)
(3)

In the formula, e ∈ E represents a road segment, V e (t)
denotes the average speed of vehicles on the road, M Se
is the maximum speed of the road, S e (t) is the average
speed of vehicles on the road at time t, Ne (t) represents
the number of vehicles on the road, M Ce is the maximum
capacity of the road, and w1 and w2 reflect the importance
of different elements, w1 + w2 =1. In this study, both w1
and w2 were set to 0.5.
Definition 2 Intersection Agent: An intersection agent is a
roadside unit deployed at a traffic intersection, serving as an
intelligent entity. The intersection agent is responsible for
monitoring the traffic congestion index of its outgoing road

Page 5 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

segments and responding to routing requests from vehicles
on its incoming road segments.
Definition 3 Vehicle Request: Vehicles operate on a firstcome, first-served basis. When a vehicle enters the decision
area, it sends a routing request, including at least the destination information, to the corresponding intersection agent
for receiving route guidance decisions.
The model for urban route guidance, based on the research
objectives and framework of this paper, can be defined as
follows: Within a networked road network structure, multiagent systems collaborate to determine the optimal driving
route for vehicles between their departure points and destinations based on route evaluation metrics. These evaluation metrics primarily include Average Travel Time (Avtt),
Average Travel Distance (Avtd), and Average Waiting Time
(Avwt). The objective is to minimize or achieve a composite
optimality across these various evaluation metrics.
Avtt =

1
N

Avtd =

1
N

Avwt =

∑

i∈N

vti 

(4)

vli 

(5)

duri 

(6)

∑

1
N

i∈N

∑

i∈N

In the formula, N represents the total number of vehicles,
vti and vli ​denote the travel time and travel distance for each
vehicle from its initial detection entering the road network
until it exits, respectively. duri represents the duration
during which each vehicle’s speed is less than or equal to
0.1 m/s.

4 Method modeling
4.1 Traffic intersection-based multi-agent
reinforcement learning modeling
Based on the characteristics of urban road network and
vehicle guidance at traffic intersections, we model the
vehicle route guidance problem as a Decentralized Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process (Dc-POMDP). The
key elements of the Dc-POMDP are elaborated as follows:
Observation oit oit represents the state observed by intersection agent i at time step t . oti =< qti , cti , pti >, where
qti denotes the vehicle routing requests received by the
intersection agent. cti ​ represents the traffic information at
the current intersection, mainly for the traffic congestion
index of the outgoing road segments and the status of traffic lights (such as current phase and remaining time). pti

represents the spatiotemporal features of the road network
as perceived through a cloud server. The methodologies
for extracting spatiotemporal features are presented in
Sect. 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.
Action ait Given observation oit ​ by agent i, action ait is
defined as a finite set of all outgoing road segments that the
incoming vehicle can be selected at each intersection.
Reward r it In our study, the reward is defined as the negative value of the time duration during which each vehicle
travels from entering one decision area at the intersection
where the agent i is located to entering the subsequent decision area in accordance with the selected action.
rti = −∆ T 

(7)

Discount factor γ: γ ∈ (0,1] is a hyperparameter in the
reward calculation that determines the importance of future
rewards. The greater the γ, the more the agent focuses on
long-term rewards.

4.2 Spatiotemporal mean-field multi-agent dueling
Q-routing method
To address the issue of vehicle route guidance at traffic
intersections, we propose a Spatiotemporal Mean-Field
Multi-Agent Dueling Q-routing (ST-MF-DQR) method.
The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. First, we utilize a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) combined with
a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) enhanced with an attention
mechanism to extract spatiotemporal dependencies from
the historical traffic states of the road network. The combination of GCN and GRU facilitates the extraction of the
spatiotemporal relationship of traffic flow at each intersection. Moreover, by means of the combination with the attention mechanism, the key information in the time sequence
data can be rapidly captured, thereby enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of the analysis. By integrating vehicle
routing requests and real-time traffic state information, the
local observation state of each intersection agent is further
derived. Second, by representing communication between
intersection agents as edges in a graph, a multi-intersection
agent connectivity graph is constructed. And then a Graph
Attention Network (GAT) is utilized to learn the spatial
correlations between intersection agents, facilitating the
transmission and fusion of spatiotemporal features. Finally,
based on mean-field theory, the interactions between vehicles are taken into account to achieve vehicle coordination.
The ST-MF-DQR algorithm effectively harnesses the spatiotemporal features of intersection agents and incorporates
the mutual influence of vehicles through mean-field theory,

13

17 Page 6 of 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

Fig. 2 Spatiotemporal mean field multi-agent dueling Q-routing (ST-MF-DQR) framework

thereby providing route guidance and achieving spatiotemporal coordination among vehicles.
4.2.1 Spatiotemporal feature fusion of traffic based on
intersection agent
Traditional reinforcement learning-based route guidance
methods typically only consider the current traffic state,
but neglecting the spatiotemporal correlations of traffic
information across the entire intricate road network. The
abundance of traffic information generated by vehicles on
the road often possesses rich spatiotemporal attributes and
is only applicable within a specific time frame or area. To
address the partial observability in the Dc-POMDP problem
[29], this paper integrates historical traffic state information
to explore the spatiotemporal dependencies of traffic states
within the road network.
Recognizing that the short-term traffic state of a road
segment is influenced by upstream and downstream segments, we employ a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
to extract the road network topology [30]. Since GCN is
capable of effectively capturing the interaction of traffic
flows (be they adjacent or non-adjacent) among road segments partitioned by intersections within the traffic network, which is crucial for enhancing the accuracy of traffic
feature extraction.
H

(l+1)

=σ



1

∼−2

D

1

∼−2

D
A

H

(l)

(l)

W





(8)

Here, H (l) represents the node feature matrix and W(l)
 = A + I signifies
denotes the weight matrix at layer l, A

13

the adjacency matrix with self-loops added to obtain a sym∼
, and σ
metric matrix, D stands for the degree matrix of A
denotes the sigmoid activation function.

The GRU demonstrates proficiency in processing time
series data and is capable of capturing the temporal dependence of traffic by learning the dynamic changes of traffic
data at intersections. Compared to Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks, the GRU aslo can effectively address
the vanishing gradient issue in Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and offers a faster runtime and fewer parameters.
Therefore, we employ GRU to capture the temporal dependencies of traffic states with the specific calculation process
as follows:
rt = σ (Wr xt + Ur ht−1 + br ) 

(9)

zt = σ (Wz xt + Uz ht−1 + bz ) 

(10)

∼

(11)

ht = tanh (Wh xt + Uh (rt *ht−1 ) + bh ) 
∼

ht = zt ∗ ht + (1 − zt ) ∗ ht−1 

(12)

In the above equations, xt represents the input at time t,
ht−1 denotes the hidden layer state from the previous time
step, and ht ​is the output state at time t. rt ​is the reset gate,
controlling how much past information to forget, zt is the
∼

update gate, balancing old and new states, and ht is the
candidate state. This mechanism allows the model to adaptively learn temporal patterns from traffic time series. The
input weights are denoted by Wr , Wz and Wh , while br ,
bz and bh ​represent the input biases, and σ is the sigmoid

Page 7 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

activation function. Next, the GRU hidden output sequence
is adaptively selected and weighted according to the attention weight.
(
)
e(t) = σ W x(t) + b 
(

(t)

exp ei

(t)
α i = ∑m

i=1

P =

∑T

i=1

)

(t)

exp(ei )



αi hi 

(13)
(14)
(15)

In the equations, e(t) signifies the score value correspond(t)
ing to the state ht extracted by the GRU and α j is the
weight coefficient at time t. The final output P serves as
the weighted representation of the spatiotemporal features
extracted at time t.
Due to the spatiotemporal evolution of the traffic environment, intersection agents do not require gathering environmental state information from all traffic intersections or
road segments in order to avoid redundancy and increased
computational complexity. The intersection agents interact
with the cloud server to obtain the spatiotemporal features
pit ∈ P of the outgoing road segments, enabling them to
effectively perceive the spatiotemporal changes in local traffic conditions. By integrating vehicle routing requests with
current traffic information, we can derive the local observation state for each intersection agent:
(
)
oit = contact qti , cit , pit 

(16)

Intersection agents should not rely solely on local observation state information, as inadequate information may result
in ineffective decision-making. Therefore, we empower
intersection agents to learn to capture critical information
and mitigate environmental instability through communication with neighboring agents [31]. And we conceptualize the
relationship between intersection agents connected by roads
as a graph and utilize a Graph Attention Network (GAT)
[32] to facilitate communication between agents. GAT
learns to assign different importance to neighboring agents
based on their current states, initially, we compute the attention coefficients between each current intersection agent i
and its neighboring agent j by the equation:
( i ) ( j )T

eij
t = ot We · ot We

∑
α ij
t =

exp(LeakyRelu(eij
t ))

j∈ Ni

exp(LeakyRelu(eij
t ))



(18)

Here, Ni denotes the set of neighboring intersections for
intersection agent i. The observation features of each agent
are propagated to adjacent agents and updated through selfattention mechanism, while the GAT unit utilizes multihead attention to stabilize the training process. Considering
that vehicle route guidance is oriented towards vehicle destinations, we then connect vehicle requests to obtain a new
representation of the observed state of the intersection agent
i, denoted as zti ​:
hit = σ

( ∑
K
1
K

k=1

∑

j∈ Ni

(
)
zti = contact qti , hit 

k j
α ijk
t W ot

)



(19)
(20)

Here, K represents the number of attention heads, and W k
is the weight matrix for attention head K.
4.2.2 Spatial-temporal mean field multi-agent dueling
Q-routing method
The intersection agent’s vehicle guidance involves directing
the vehicle to the appropriate next traffic intersection based
on the average action and global state of the vehicle at the
traffic intersection, similar to the IP packet routing process.
Therefore, this paper adopts a Q-routing algorithm [21] that
applies reinforcement learning to address the packet routing problem, specifically for action selection in intersection vehicles. First, we treat each traffic intersection as an
independent agent. For a traffic intersection ni , it needs to
constantly process the first vehicle in its queue, destined
for traffic intersection nd . The agent ni ​needs to select an
action a to direct the vehicle to the adjacent intersection
agent nj ​as the next hop. The reward is defined as the negative value of the travel time between traffic intersections ni
and nj . Upon receiving the reward ri , traffic intersection
ni updates its Q table based on the reward ri :
Qtable−i (n
[d , nj ) = (1 − α ) Qtable−i (n
] d , nj )
+ a rli + max Qtable−j (nj , nk )



(21)

k

(17)

Here, We ​ represents the embedding parameters. Subsequently, the attention coefficients undergo normalization to
derive the attention scores by the equation:

Here, α ∈ (0, 1] is the learning rate, and nk represents
the neighboring nodes of nj . While the routing agent ni ​
estimates travel time for a vehicle passing through intersection ni ​towards the destination nd based on its Q table,
it overlooks coordination between vehicles within the road
network.

13

17 Page 8 of 17

Mean Field Game (MFG) theory offers a powerful
framework for studying stochastic dynamic games [33,
34], characterized by: (1) a large number of participants;
(2) infinitesimally small impact of any single individual
on the environment. The core concept of MFG theory is to
approximate the original large-scale game problem with the
optimal control problem of a single individual in an appropriate sense, analyzing the best response of the mean field
(the average behavior of the group). Vehicle route selection
process in traffic environments shares similar characteristics
with MFG: Typically, a substantial number of vehicles are
present on the roads across the city, and decision of a single
vehicle has minimal impact on other vehicles. However, the
same direction movement of many vehicles will have a significant impact on road traffic. That is, the route selection of
a vehicle depends only on the current vehicle’s strategy and
the distribution of strategies of other vehicles, without needing to distinguish or understand the movement characteristics of each individual vehicles. Therefore, it is unnecessary
to study pairwise interactions among all vehicles, instead,
the focus should be on the interaction between the individual vehicle and the state (or action) distribution of the
entire population of vehicles. Specifically, for each intersection agent, we contemplate computing the average motion
information of vehicles passing through and queuing at the
intersection to provide guidance for the requesting vehicle.
From the perspective of a moving vehicle, subsequent to
traversing the preceding intersection agent, it will issue a
request as it approaches the succeeding intersection agent.
If the vehicle sends a routing request to agent i, taking into
account other vehicles on the road network, its guiding
action
(
)
ait is determined by the value function Qi zti , ait , a− ,
where a− represents the joint actions of all other vehicles.
For the current vehicle, this may contain redundant information. In terms of route guidance task, actions of distant vehicles have limited impact on it. For instance, when a vehicle
Fig. 3 The distribution of vehicles
action in the neighborhood

13

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

encounters a decision point at an intersection, the influencing factors primarily consist of the vehicles on the selectable
roads and those will pass through the current intersection.
a− ​can be approximated as the action distribution of nearby
vehicles. Referring to the mean field approximation in [35],
this approximate action information is denoted as the average action of neighboring vehicles. In this study, considering a discrete action space, the available action space for
vehicles can be encoded by one-hot encoding. We define
′

the average action of neighboring vehicles as a ​ (refer to
Eq. 22), which represents the distribution of vehicle actions
influenced by the current intersection agent j within a time
period T , as shown in the example in Fig. 3. In the left figure, there are 7 vehicles in the current state select right turn
action and 3 vehicles in the current state select down-going
action; in the right figure, there are 4, 1 and 2 vehicles in the
current state select right-going, down-going and up-going
action respectively.
−

a=

1
Nj

∑

c
c ∈ N (j) a 
t∈ T

(22)

Here, N refers to a collection of vehicles, c refers to one of
these vehicles, and ac refers to the guiding action of vehicle
c in the current state.
According to the previous idea and the principle of mean
field reinforcement learning [33, 36], the action value function can be approximately expressed as:
(
)
Qi zti , ait , a− =

1
Nj

( i i c)
i
c ∈ N (i) Q zt , at , a
( t ∈ T)

∑

−i

≈ Qi zti , ait , a



(23)

The dueling DQN [37] is an improved method based on
DQN, which introduces a novel network structure. In this

Page 9 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

structure, the Q function is decomposed into two subfunctions (as shown in Eq. 24): the state value function
V (oi ; ω , β ) and the advantage function A(oi , a; ω , α ).
The state value function represents the expected return in a
given state, while the advantage function measures the extra
reward of taking a specific action compared to other actions.
( i i
)
( i
)
i
i
[ Q zt , at ; ω, α, β = V zt ; ω, β + ]
(
)
) 
∑ i( i ′
Ai zti , ait ; ω, α − A1
A zt , a ; ω, α

(24)

a

ω represents the shared network parameters, while α and
β denote the parameters of the advantage function network
and the value function network, respectively. For simplicity,
we will uniformly use ω to represent the parameters of the
Q network in the following sections.
Finally, combining Eqs. (21) and (24), the agent updates
the parameters of Qi by minimizing the loss function L
through interactions with neighboring agents:
2
L (ω i ) = (yj − Qi (zti , ait , a ; ω i )) 

(25)

(
)
j
yj = r + γ max a′t+1 Qj zt+1
, a′t+1 , a ; ω j × (1 − fj ) 

(26)

In the equation, yj represents the target Q value, Qj indicates the network of the next intersection agent that the
vehicle arrives at, γ is the discount factor, and fj is the indicator of whether the vehicle has reached its destination. If
the vehicle has reached its destination, fj = 1; otherwise,
fj = 0.

5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental environment
This paper utilizes the open-source traffic simulation software SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​e​c​l​i​p​
s​e​.​d​e​v​/​s​u​m​o​/​​​​)​ to evaluate traffic guidance algorithms and
visualize simulation activities. TraCI (Traffic Control Interface) and Libsumo interface are employed for data acquisition from the SUMO traffic simulation environment and for
real-time modifications and control. For the experimental
data, we used synthetic and real network data with synthetic
traffic.
Synthetic traffic network We synthesized a 5 × 5 traffic grid,
as shown in Fig. 4. It comprises 25 intersections and 120 road
segments. Each intersection is linked by 4 pairs of opposing
road segments, and each directed road segment consists of
two lanes with a total length of 15,000.00 m. Vehicles are
introduced into the network at rates of 40 vehicles/min, 60
vehicles/min, and 80 vehicles/min over a period of 1800 s
to simulate low, medium, and high traffic flows. 70% of the
vehicles enter the network from its edges, with starting locations distributed randomly.
Yuelu traffic network We extracted a portion of the road
network for Yuelu District in Changsha City from OpenStreetMap, as depicted in Fig. 5. The coverage encompasses
35 intersections and 114 road segments. Each intersection
is linked by 3 or 4 pairs of road segments in opposite directions, with segments featuring either two or three lanes and
a total length of 56,329.01 m. Vehicles are introduced into
the network at rates of 120 vehicles/min, 160 vehicles/min,
and 200 vehicles/min over a period of 1800 s to simulate

Fig. 4 The synthetic traffic network
with 25 intersections and 120 road
segments

13

17 Page 10 of 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

Fig. 5 Real traffic network for
Yuelu Distict with 35 intersections
and 114 road segments

length of 5,5000 m. The traffic flow and turn rate data are
derived from actual taxi trajectory data.

5.2 Baseline methods and evaluation metrics
To evaluate the multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
method for traffic intersection-based route guidance, we
conducted a comparison of the following four methods:
Dijkstra [15]: Vehicles aim to reach their destination
by selecting the route with the shortest current travel
time.
2. Dynamic User Assignment (DUA) 2: DUA is an iterative method implemented by SUMO developers, utilizing the duarouter tool to calculate the fastest route for
each vehicle based on current road network congestion
in order to achieve dynamic user equilibrium. That is no
vehicle can reduce its travel cost (typically travel time)
by changing its route.
3. DQN-routing [21]: This method, proposed by Dmitry
Mukhutdinov and others, models the routing problem as
a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning problem and
employs deep neural networks to represent each routing
agent as a learning entity, providing a distributed routing approach applicable to systems such as communication networks and logistics (e.g., traffic route guidance).
4. GA-DQ-routing [10]: This method, proposed by F.
Arasteh and others, is a network-aware multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning method for guiding vehicle routes. It combines Graph Attention Networks and
1.
Fig. 6 Real traffic network for Manhattan with 48 intersections and
230 road segments

low, medium, and high traffic flows. Vehicle starting locations are distributed randomly.
Manhattan traffic network1 We used a real-world dataset
from Manhattan, New York, as illustrated in Fig. 6. It is
a 16 × 3 grid network in Manhattan consisting of 48 intersections and 230 road sections. Each intersection has four
approaches and four exits, and each consisting of three lanes
(left turn lane, through lane, and right turn lane), with a total

2
1

​h​t​t​p​s​:​​​/​​/​t​r​a​f​f​​i​​c​-​​s​i​g​​n​a​​l​​-​c​o​​n​t​r​​o​l​.​g​i​t​h​​u​b​.​i​o​/​.

13

For details on the DUA, the reader may refer to https:​​​//su​mo.​dl​r.de​
/do​cs/​Demand/​Dyna​mic_User_ Assignment.html .

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

Page 11 of 17 17
Table 1 Comparison of algorithm performance in synthetic traffic network (80 vehicles/minute) environment
Algorithm
Avtt (s)
Avtd (m)
Avwt (s)
Dijkstra
189.97
910.55
88.65
DUA
150.54
895.26
63.29
DQN-routing
149.78
902.79
61.42
GA-DQ-routing
140.33
901.61
52.90
ST-MF-DQR
125.96
896.87
43.09
Table 2 Comparison of algorithm performance in Yuelu traffic network (200 vehicles/minute)
Algorithm
Avtt (s)
Avtd (m)
Avwt (s)
Dijkstra
519.58
3559.22
274.50
DUA
404.40
3476.26
190.15
DQN-routing
407.06
3475.16
194.36
GA-DQ-routing
404.64
3454.73
182.42
ST-MF-DQR
363.47
3338.52
155.44
Table 3 Comparison of algorithm performance in Manhattan traffic
network
Algorithm
Avtt (s)
Avtd (m)
Avwt (s)
Dijkstra
494.94
1142.63
345.46
DUA
372.15
1186.67
234.79
DQN-routing
322.45
1293.26
225.86
GA-DQ-routing
319.17
1286.73
220.74
ST-MF-DQR
288.80
1265.23
179.55

Fig. 7 Comparison of average vehicle travel time for different traffic
arrival rates

Q-routing methods to provide guidance for vehicle
routes.
We use the three metrics from Sect. 3.1 to evaluate
the performance of different algorithms in vehicle route
guidance.

5.3 Method comparison and results analysis
The experiments were conducted in a Python 3.8 environment using the PyTorch deep learning framework. The
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) within the Q-networks of
all agents contains a hidden layer with 128 neurons. The
discount factor is configured as 0.99, the learning rate for
agents is set to 0.01, and the optimizer employs the commonly used Adam; The GCN consists of one layer with a
hidden size of 32. The hidden size of the GRU is set to 128,

and the GAT utilizes 4 attention heads with a hidden size of
32. Each episode consists of 600 steps, with a batch size of
64. The learning rate is set to 0.001, and the optimizer uses
the common RMSprop. Subsequently, we will present the
experimental comparison and result analysis for the method
proposed in this paper.
As shown in Fig. 7, in both the synthetic 5 × 5 traffic network and the real traffic network in the Yuelu District of
Changsha, the proposed method consistently achieves lower
average vehicle travel times compared to the baseline methods across varying vehicle arrival rates. This demonstrates
the robustness and adaptability of the proposed method to
different traffic scenarios.
Table 1 illustrates the performance of the proposed
method in terms of Average Travel Time (Avtt), Average
Travel Distance (Avtd), and Average Waiting Time (Avwt),
and compares it with Dijkstra, DUA, and GA-DQ-routing
(Tables 2 and 3).
The Average Travel Time (Avtt) and Average Waiting
Time (Avwt) are key performance metrics for evaluating
route guidance methods. A lower Avtt indicates reduced time
spent on the road, while a lower Avwt signifies decreased
congestion and smoother vehicle movement. In addition,
the Average Distance Traveled (Avtd) indicates the optimization degree of the algorithm in terms of the route planning distance. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves optimal performance, especially

13

17 Page 12 of 17

for the Avtt and Avwt, on the three datasets. Compared to
other baseline methods, our method has the lowest Avtt
on all datasets, signifying its effectiveness in reducing the
Avtt. The Avwt performance of our method is also significantly superior to other methods, reflecting its advantages in
reducing congestion and improving traffic mobility.
In the more complex Manhattan traffic network, our
method exhibits more obvious advantages. Although GADQ-routing introduces Graph attention network (GAT) to
improve network awareness, it remains challenging to fully
capture spatio-temporal characteristics, and the modeling of multi-vehicle interactions is limited. In comparison
to GA-DQ-routing, which demonstrates the best performance among the baseline methods, the Avtt in our method
is reduced by (288.80–319.17.80.17)/288.80 = 10.51%, and
the Avwt is reduced by (179.55- 220.74)/179.55 = 22.94%. In
other words, our method achieves significant advantages in
both Avtt and Avwt indices through the synergistic effect of
spatiotemporal feature extraction and mean field modeling.
Figure 8 illustrates thermal maps of the Traffic Congestion Index (TCI) for each road at different times under the
5 × 5 synthetic traffic network (80 vehicles/minute), Yuelu
District of Changsha (200 vehicles/minute) traffic network
and Manhattan traffic network environments. The horizontal
axis represents time, while the vertical axis denotes different
roads. In comparison to alternative methods, the heatmaps
for the ST-MF-DQR depict more roads with lower congestion indices. This indicates that ST-MF-DQR effectively
distributes vehicles more evenly across all roads, demonstrating its ability to make better use of limited road capacity and alleviate imbalances in traffic flow, thereby reducing
urban traffic congestion more effectively than other common method.
Figure 9 (a), (b) and (c) depict the training curves for Avtt
in the 5 × 5 traffic network (80 vehicles/minute), the Yuelu
District of Changsha (200 vehicles/minute) and Manhattan
traffic network, respectively. It can be observed that the Avtt
for all three methods gradually converges as the number of
training iterations increases. However, it is noteworthy that
the proposed method demonstrates faster converges and
achieves a lower Avtt value compared to the baseline methods, indicating its effectiveness and robustness in achieving
convergence.

5.4 Ablation experiments
To evaluate the contribution of individual components
within the proposed ST-MF-DQR framework, the following
ablation studies are conducted:
(1) MF-DQR: By removing the GCN and GRU components
combined with the attention mechanism, we validate

13

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

the contribution of spatiotemporal feature extraction to
the performance of traffic route guidance.
(2) ST-DQR: By removing the vehicle interaction modeling based on mean field theory, we validate the importance of multi-vehicle collaboration in optimizing route
selection.
In ablation experiments, as can be observed from Table 4,
the Avtt of MF-DQR increased significantly, especially in
the Manhattan road network by 10.19%. This indicates that
spatio-temporal characteristics are crucial for route optimization in complex dynamic scenarios. Although ST-DQR
also achieves good results on the three datasets, compared
with ST-MF-DQR, both Avtt and Avwt increase to varying degrees. This also indicates that it is necessary to consider the coordination among vehicles in the vehicle route
guidance.

5.5 Discussion
Over all, the proposed scheme has the following advantages: (1) Cloud-edge computing is utilized to deploy multiagent deep reinforcement learning in key spatiotemporal
environments (i.e. intersections), and mean field theory is
employed to achieve cooperative interactive learning based
on key spatio-temporal locations. Moreover, by leveraging
GCN, GRU and the attention mechanism, the spatiotemporal characteristics as well as the interaction relationship
between intersections are obtained. This enables real-time
guidance when vehicles approach intersections within different ranges and at different times. This approach not only
takes into account the global traffic situation but also considers the interaction among the key traffic nodes, enabling
more accurate and efficient feature extraction. (2) The
method proposed in this paper adjusts the route in real time
based on the current travel to the intersection as well as the
current local and global states. In contrast to the traditional
approach, which merely plans the path to the destination
according to the global state. Therefore, the method presented in this paper can address the challenges mentioned
above.
In addition, this paper also considers some effective
strategies for enhancing decision-making efficiency. For
instance, based on cloud-edge computing architecture,
global traffic characteristics are mined in the cloud, while
roadside units mainly only process local information. Furthermore, average field game method is adopted to simplify
guided decision processing.
Finally, we analyze the computational complexity of the
proposed scheme. Since deep reinforcement learning is a
cyclic process, we analyze the time complexity of an inference process. In our scheme, we suppose that the hidden

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

Page 13 of 17 17

Fig. 8 Heat Map Comparison of
Traffic Congestion Indices

13

17 Page 14 of 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17

dimension is h, and the number of connecting edges between
agents and adjacent agents is much smaller than the number
of agents N. On this basis, the inference time is mainly spent
on graph computing. Thus, the complexity is mainly composed of the following parts: (1) The GCN-GRU-attention.
Its complexity is O(L · E · h + (∆ t · h2 + ∆ t2 · h )),
where L is the number of GCN layers, E is the number of
edges of the global graph, and Δt is the length of the time
series. (2) The GAT layer computing. Its time complexity is
O(N · h2 ), where the size of the traffic network, the number
of agents and the hidden state will affect the computing cost
of the algorithm.

6 Conclusions

Fig. 9 Average travel time training curve

13

This work proposes a multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning method for urban vehicle route guidance within
a cloud-edge computing framework. Leveraging multiagent reinforcement learning, the framework optimizes
route guidance by accounting for spatiotemporal variations,
thereby balancing urban traffic flow and alleviate local congestion. Furthermore, we propose an approach for extracting spatiotemporal traffic state information using Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) and Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) with attention mechanisms. Additionally, we use
Graph Attention Networks (GAT) to model the intersectionlevel spatial dependencies, enabling the transfer and integration of the distributed spatiotemporal traffic features.
Specifically, we introduce the Spatiotemporal Mean Field
Multi-Agent Dueling Q-routing (ST-MF-DQR) algorithm,
which incorporates mean field theory to coordinate vehicle
actions within spatiotemporal constraints, enhancing multiagent cooperation. The proposed method was experimentally validated on the SUMO simulation platform using
both synthetic and real traffic networks. Comparative evaluations against various baseline approaches demonstrated its
superior performance across multiple metrics, effectively
improving urban vehicle route guidance and multi-agent
cooperation. In the future, we will analyze the influence
of traffic signal duration, quantity, and road level on traffic conditions. Additionally, we will fully integrate all key
factors and intelligent traffic signal facilities into the route
guidance system for enhancing the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. We will also explore integrating the
proposed route guidance framework with reinforcement
learning-based intersection signal control. By jointly optimizing vehicle routing and signal control within the same
multi-agent framework, we aim to achieve a more holistic
and coordinated traffic management system, thereby further
improving urban traffic efficiency.

Page 15 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17
Table 4 Results of the ablation experiments of the ST-MF-DQR
Traffic Network
Type
GCN and GRU combined
with attention
Synthetic
MF-DQR
ST-DQR
√
ST-MF-DQR
√
Yuelu
MF-DQR
ST-DQR
√
ST-MF-DQR
√
Manhattan
MF-DQR
ST-DQR
√
ST-MF-DQR
√
Author contributions Zhuhua Liao: conceptualization, methodology,
writing-review & editing. Junjian Gao: methodology, resources, writing-original draft. Aiping Yi: conceptualization, methodology, writing-original draft. Yijiang Zhao: writing-review & editing. Yue Tang:
writing-review & editing.
Funding This work was supported by the Humanities and Social Sciences Project of Ministry of Education of China (No. 24YJAZH237)
and the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (Grant No.
2024JJ5163).
Data availability The real-world dataset from Manhattan, New York:
https://traffic-signal-control. github.io. Data source: Manhattan_16 × 3.

Mean field theory-based Vehicle
interaction modeling
√
√
√
√
√
√

9.
10.

11.
12.

Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Ethics declaration Not applicable.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

Nagy, A.M., Simon, V.: Improving traffic prediction using congestion propagation patterns in smart cities [J]. Advanced Engineering Informatics 50, 101343 (2021)
Walraven, E., Spaan, M.T., Bakker, B.: Traffic flow optimization:
A reinforcement learning approach [J]. Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence 52, 203–212 (2016)
Wang, B., Zhang, Y., Shi, J., Wang, P., Wang, X., Bai, L., Wang,
Y.: Knowledge expansion and consolidation for continual traffic
prediction with expanding graphs [J]. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24(7), 7190–7201 (2023)
Lin, J., Yu, W., Yang, X., et al.: A Real-Time En-Route route guidance decision scheme for Transportation-Based cyberphysical
systems [J]. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 66(3), 2551–2566 (2017)
Zhang, Y., Zhao, W., Wang, J., Yuan, Y.: Recent progress, challenges and future prospects of applied deep reinforcement learning: A practical perspective in path planning [J]. Neurocomputing
608, 128423 (2024)
Luo, L., Sheng, L., Yu, H., et al.: Intersection-based V2X routing
via reinforcement learning in vehicular ad hoc networks [J]. IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23(6), 5446–5459 (2021)
Ahmad, A., Din, S., Paul, A., et al.: Real-Time route planning and
data dissemination for urban scenarios using the internet of things
[J]. IEEE Wireless Communications 26(6), 50–55 (2019)
Zhu, L., Li, B., Tan, L.: Vehicular edge cloud computing content
caching optimization solution based on content prediction and

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

Avtt (s)

Avtd (m)

Avwt (s)

138.73
131.43
125.96
393.00
405.32
363.47
318.25
316.89
288.80

908.74
907.26
896.87
3413.44
3453.88
3338.52
1283.01
1274.83
1265.23

51.36
45.30
43.09
171.99
197.00
155.44
183.95
181.64
179.55

deep reinforcement learning [J]. Ad Hoc Networks 165, 103643
(2024)
Mao, C., Shen, Z.: A reinforcement learning framework for the
adaptive routing problem in stochastic time-dependent network
[J]. Transp. Res. Part. C: Emerg. Technol. 93, 179–197 (2018)
Arasteh, F., Sheikhgargar, S., Papagelis, M.: Network-aware
multi-agent reinforcement learning for the vehicle navigation
problem [C]. Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems ((SIGSPATIAL), 4
pages. (2022)
Du, S., Zhu, Z., Wang, X., et al.: Real-time local path planning
strategy based on deep distributional reinforcement learning [J].
Neurocomputing 599, 128085 (2024)
Shang, J., Cong, Q.T., Mehdi, K.E.: Regional route guidance with
realistic compliance patterns: Application of deep reinforcement
learning and MPC [J]. Transp. Res. Part. C: Emerg. Technol. 158,
104440 (2024)
Khalid, M., Wang, L., Wang, K., et al.: Deep reinforcement learning-based long-range autonomous valet parking for smart cities
[J]. Sustainable Cities Soc. 89, 104311 (2023)
Lu, J., Li, J., Yuan, Q., et al.: A multi-vehicle cooperative routing
method based on evolutionary game theory [C]. Proceedings of
the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC),
(2019)
Dijkstra, E.W.: A note on two problems in connexion with graphs
[M]. in: Edsger Wybe Dijkstra: His Life, Work, and Legacy, 287–
290. (2022)
Wang, B., Ma, J., Wang, P., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Z., Wang,
Y.: Stone: A spatio-temporal ood learning framework kills both
spatial and temporal shifts [C]. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(pp. 2948–2959). (2024), August
Chen, B., Ding, Z., Wu, Y., et al.: An optimal global algorithm
for route guidance in advanced traveler information systems [J].
Information Sciences 555, 33–45 (2021)
Liebig, T., Piatkowski, N., Bockermann, C., et al.: Dynamic route
planning with real-time traffic predictions [J]. Inform. Syst. 64,
258–265 (2017)
Zhu, W., Zhu, C., Prediction-based, A.: Route guidance method
toward intelligent and green transportation system [J]. IEEE
Internet Things J. 10(14), 12763–12776 (2023)
Koh, S., Zhou, B., Fang, H., et al.: Real-time deep reinforcement
learning based vehicle navigation [J]. Appl. Soft Comput. 96,
106694 (2020)
Mukhutdinov, D., Filchenkov, A., Shalyto, A., et al.: Multi-agent
deep learning for simultaneous optimization for time and energy
in distributed routing system [J]. Future Generation Comput.
Syst. 94, 587–600 (2019)
Tang, C., Hu, W., Hu, S., et al.: Urban traffic route guidance
method with high adaptive learning ability under diverse traffic

13

17 Page 16 of 17

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

scenarios [J]. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22(5), 2956–2968
(2020)
Lin, K., Li, C., Li, Y., et al.: Distributed learning for vehicle routing decision in software defined internet of vehicles [J]. IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22(6), 3730–3741 (2021)
Shou, Z., Chen, X., Fu, Y., et al.: Multi-agent reinforcement learning for Markov routing games: A new modeling paradigm for
dynamic traffic assignment [J]. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 137, 103560 (2022)
Zhang, Y., Yu, Z., Zhang, J., et al.: Learning decentralized traffic
signal controllers with Multi-Agent graph reinforcement learning
[J]. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 23(6), 7180–7195 (2024)
Bie, Y., Ji, Y., Ma, D.: Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
collaborative traffic signal control method considering intersection heterogeneity [J]. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 164, 104663 (2024)
Liu, J., Qin, S., Su, M., et al.: Multiple intersections traffic signal
control based on cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
[J]. Inf. Sci. 647, 119484 (2023)
Menda, K., Chen, Y.C., Grana, J., et al.: Deep reinforcement
learning for Event-Driven Multi-Agent decision processes [J].
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20(4),
1259–1268 (2019)
Hausknecht, M., Stone, P.: Deep recurrent Q-learning for partially
observable MDPs [C]. proceedings of the AAAI fall symposium
series, (2015)
Liao, Z., Huang, H., Zhao, Y., et al.: Analysis and forecast of traffic flow between urban functional areas based on Ride-Hailing
trajectories [J]. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information
12(4), 144 (2023)
Chen, H., Liu, Y., Zhou, Z., et al.: Gama: Graph attention multiagent reinforcement learning algorithm for Cooperation [J]. Appl.
Intell. 50, 4195–4205 (2020)
VeliČkoviĆ, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., et al.: Graph attention
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:171010903, (2017)
Tanaka, T., Nekouei, E., Pedram, A.R., et al.: Linearly solvable
mean-field traffic routing games [J]. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control.
66(2), 880–887 (2020)
Cabannes, T., Lauriere, M., Perolat, J., et al.: Solving N-player
dynamic routing games with congestion: A mean field approach.
(2021). arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11943
Yang, Y., Luo, R., Li, M., et al.: Mean field multi-agent reinforcement learning [C]. International conference on machine learning
(ICML), 5571–5580. (2018)
Ren, J., Zheng, J., Guo, X., et al.: MeFi: Mean field reinforcement
learning for cooperative routing in wireless sensor network[J].
IEEE Internet Things J. 11(1), 995–1011 (2023)
Su, Y., Zhang, T., Xu, M., Tan, M., et al.: Rough knowledge
enhanced dueling deep Q-network for household integrated
demand response optimization [J]. Sustainable Cities and Society
101, 105065 (2024)

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
such publishing agreement and applicable law.

13

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17
Zhuhua Liao received the Ph.D.
degree in Computer Architecture
from Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2012. From 2016 to
2017, he was a Visiting Scholar
with the Department of Computer
Science, Memphis University in
the United States. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the
Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology,
China. His research interests
include cloud/edge computing,
machine learning and intelligent
transportation.
Junjian Gao received the master’s degree in software engineering at the Hunan University of
Science and Technology, China, in
2025. His main research interests
are in the fields of artificial intelligence, data mining and intelligent transportation.

Aiping Yi received the master’s
degree in control engineering at
the Hunan University of Science
and Technology, China, in 2014.
Currently she is an engineer and
works for the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Hunan
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China. Her
main research interests are in the
fields of data mining, artificial
intelligence
and
distributed
computing.

Page 17 of 17 17

Cluster Computing (2026) 29:17
Yijiang Zhao received the
Ph.D. degree in Central South
University, Changsha, China, in
2016. From 2018 to 2019, he was
a Visiting Scholar in Purdue University. He has been a professor in
Hunan University of Science and
Technology, Xiangtan, China. His
research interests include modeling and processing of crowdsourcing
geographic
data,
spatiotemporal data mining, etc.

Yue Tang is currently an undergraduate student majoring in computer science and technology at
the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology,
Xiangtan, China. Her main
research interests are data mining
and artificial intelligence.

13

