2023 20th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR)
June 25-28, 2023. Hawaii Convention Center, Honolulu, Hawaii

Robust Route Planning with Distributional Reinforcement Learning in
a Stochastic Road Network Environment

2023 20th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR) | 979-8-3503-3517-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/UR57808.2023.10202222

Xi Lin1 , Paul Szenher1 , John D. Martin2 , Brendan Englot1
Abstract— Route planning is essential to mobile robot navigation problems. In recent years, deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) has been applied to learning optimal planning policies
in stochastic environments without prior knowledge. However,
existing works focus on learning policies that maximize the
expected return, the performance of which can vary greatly
when the level of stochasticity in the environment is high. In this
work, we propose a distributional reinforcement learning based
framework that learns return distributions which explicitly
reflect environmental stochasticity. Policies based on the secondorder stochastic dominance (SSD) relation can be used to make
adjustable route decisions according to user preference on
performance robustness. Our proposed method is evaluated
in a simulated road network environment, and experimental
results show that our method is able to plan the shortest routes
that minimize stochasticity in travel time when robustness
is preferred, while other state-of-the-art DRL methods are
agnostic to environmental stochasticity.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Endowing mobile robots with the ability to autonomously
navigate has been viewed as a major challenge to realizing
their full potential as autonomous embodied systems [1], [2].
In an autonomous navigation task, a mobile robot is typically
asked to navigate collision-free from a start point to a goal
point, sometimes without an accurate or complete prior map,
and it is challenging to efficiently plan routes without prior
knowledge.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a way for embodied
systems to acquire high-performance policies to operate in
stochastic environments through trial-and-error learning [3].
Given no prior information describing the environment, a RL
agent can learn by directly interacting with the environment.
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) combines RL with
deep neural network architectures, and has been widely used
to solve practical problems with high-dimensional sensory
inputs in recent years. One of the earliest examples, DQN
[4], was able to play Atari 2600 games to superhuman levels.
DRL methods have also shown the ability to learn desired
route planning policies in unknown stochastic environments,
which can be efficiently executed via neural network inference at run-time.
Existing DRL based route planners select the route that
maximizes the expectation of accumulated rewards (e.g.,
the blue path in Figure 1), which may be associated with
1 Xi Lin, Paul Szenher and Brendan Englot are with the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stevens Institute of
Technology, 1 Castle Point Terrace, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

{xlin26,pszenher,benglot}@stevens.edu
2 John D. Martin is with the Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, 116 St. and 85 Ave., Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2R377,
Canada jmartin8@ualberta.ca

979-8-3503-3517-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

Fig. 1: Example routes in a simulated urban environment. Green,
magenta and black blocks represent the start, goal, and a crosswalk
with stochastic delay. The blue line is the shortest length route.

high variance and suffer from unstable performance across
trials when the operating environment is highly stochastic.
A possible solution is Distributional Reinforcement Learning (Distributional RL) [5], which aims at learning return
distributions and enables various policies beyond expectation
maximization. Recent works in this area (described below)
have used Distributional RL to learn mobile robot controllers
that can achieve safe navigation performance by avoiding
actions with highly uncertain outcomes.
In this paper, we propose a route planning framework
that learns environmental stochastitcity with distributional
RL, and is capable of selecting a robust route with
execution policies based on the second-order stochastic
dominance (SSD) relation. The performance of our
framework is demonstrated in simulated urban road
network environments where travel time stochasticity
exists in certain states. While state-of-the-art RL methods
are agnostic to travel time stochasticity, our framework
could plan routes that circumvent those states when
robustness is preferred (e.g., the red path in Figure
1). The code of our approach is available at https:
//github.com/RobustFieldAutonomyLab/
Stochastic_Road_Network.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II introduces related works about RL based route planners
and distributional RL based mobile robot controllers; Section
III introduces the RL problem setup; Section IV introduces
our proposed robust learning and execution framework based
287

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

on distributional RL; Section V introduces the road network
environments we build for studying the robust route planning
problem; Section VI shows route planning experiment results
and analysis; Section VII concludes the paper and comments
on plans for future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been used to
develop solutions to route planning problems in unknown
stochastic environments. Qian et al. [6] considered the charging station navigation problem for electric vehicles in an
urban environment with unknown uncertainty in traffic conditions, price and waiting time at different charging stations,
and proposed a DRL based planner that could select a goal
station and route that minimize travel time and charging cost.
Zhang et al. [7] also worked on the route planning problem
for electric vehicles, but with an emphasis on the power
management issue; they used reinforcement learning to train
a route planner that could efficiently plan paths that minimize
overall energy consumption. Geng et al. [8] proposed a
DRL based route planner that minimizes travel time by
predicting pedestrian flows in congested environments; the
proposed planner outperforms A* when congestion occurs.
Koh et al. [9] proposed a DRL based real-time navigation system operating in complex city maps with varying
traffic conditions; the system re-plans the route for the
ego vehicle given its surrounding instant traffic information,
achieving better performance in travel time than dynamicDijkstra and dynamic-A*. Basso et al. [10] studied dynamic
route planning for electric delivery service vehicles where
customer requests and energy consumption are stochastic,
proposing a DRL based solution that learns to anticipate
future customer requests and energy consumption, planning
routes for delivery and battery charging that minimize energy
consumption and prevent battery depletion.
Distributional reinforcement learning (Distributional RL)
has recently been used to learn risk-aware control policies
in mobile robot navigation tasks. Choi et al. [11] focused on
the indoor navigation of a mobile ground robot, and trained
a distributional RL agent that could learn the collision risk of
control commands (linear and angular velocity); the proposed
method outperforms traditional RL in the collision avoidance
success rate. Kamran et al. [12] designed a distributional RL
based autonomous vehicle controller for automated merging
and crossing at occluded intersections, where other vehicles’
behaviors are uncertain; the proposed method exhibits adjustable performance that balances travel time and driving
comfort according to user preference at run-time. Liu et
al. [13] proposed an adaptive risk-aware control policy for
a micro drone navigation task; the algorithm automatically
adjusts the threshold of Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR)
according to the level of environmental uncertainty during
the learning of a distributional RL agent, which shows robust
navigation performance without human effort in parameter
tuning. Given that distributional RL has been proven to
be effective in learning risk-aware policies, we use it to

develop a high-level route planning framework that is robust
to uncertainties in the environment.
III. P ROBLEM S ETTING
Using the standard problem setting for RL, the interaction
between the agent and the environment is formalized as a
Markov Decision Process (S, A, P, R, γ), where S, A, and
are the set of states and actions. At each time step t, the
agent receives an observation of the current state st ∈ S,
and decides an action at ∈ A. It causes the environment
transition to the state st+1 ∼ P(·|st , at ) , and the agent
receives an observation of st+1 , as well as a reward rt+1 =
R(st+1 , at+1 ). A common way to find an optimal policy in
RL is to maximize the expected future return Qπ .
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [

∞
X

γ k rt+k+1 |st = s, at = a].

(1)

k=0

It’s also known as the action-value function, which starts
with a state-action pair (st , at ) and follows the policy π
thereafter. Discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1) controls the effect of
future rewards.
Qπ (s, a) = E[R(s, a)] + γE[Qπ (s′ , a′ )]
′

(2)
′

T Q(s, a) := E[R(s, a)] + γE[max
Q(s , a )]
′
a

(3)

The relation between Qπ and its successors satisfies the
Bellman equation (2), where s′ ∼ P(·|s, a), and a′ ∼
π(·|s′ ). An optimal policy could be solved using the Bellman
optimality operator (3).
D

Z π (s, a) = R(s, a) + γZ π (s′ , a′ )

(4)

D

T Z(s, a) := R(s, a) + γZ π (s′ , argmaxa′ E[Z(s′ , a′ )]) (5)
Instead of the expected return, Distributional RL algorithms [5] focus on the return distribution, which satisfies
the distributional Bellman equation (4), where Z π (s, a) is
a random variable that satisfies Qπ (s, a) = E[Z π (s, a)].
Similarly, the distributional Bellman optimality equation
(5) is used in this case. This permits the estimation of a
collection of outcomes that could result from the stochasticity
inherent in the agent’s domain. For instance, if the reward
encodes a robot’s transition time, then its return distribution
reflects the spread in total travel times that result from taking
different routes whose random traffic conditions vary.
IV. ROBUST L EARNING AND E XECUTION F RAMEWORK
Our proposed robust learning and execution framework is
illustrated in Figure 2. In the learning process, the agent
interacts with the environment according to the behavior
policy πβ , and updates the return distribution Z(s, a; θ) with
the learning policy πα . During the execution process, the
agent decides the action to take with the learned return
distributions Z(s, a; θ) and the execution policy πψ .
Consider an example when the learning and execution
policies are the same. In this case, the robot would learn
for some period of time, stop using its behavior policy, then
start using its execution policy. In settings where robustness
288

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Learning

Training
Environment

𝑎𝑡 =
𝜋𝛽 (𝑍(𝑠,⋅; 𝜃))

The SSD relation is defined using distribution functions
and compared over the set of their realizable values. Consider
two expected returns, G and G′ , respectively induced by
actions a and a′ . We say that G stochastically dominates G′
(2)
in
R z the second order when their integrated CDFs, F (z) :=
F
(x)dx,
satisfy
the
following
equation,
and
we
denote
−∞
the relation G ⪰(2) G′ :

𝑆𝑡+1
𝑅𝑡+1
𝑅𝑡

𝜃 ← update with
samples and 𝜋𝛼

𝑆𝑡

𝑍(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃)

(2)

𝑆𝑡

𝑆𝑡+1

Execution
Environment

Execution
Fig. 2: Robust Learning and Execution framework.

is desired, however, it can be beneficial to use a distinct
execution policy to impose additional robustness preferences
on decisions.
A. Learning
We use QR-DQN [14] to learn return distribution Z(s, a),
which is approximated with a uniform distribution of N
Diracs, Zθ (s, a), where θi is the value corresponding to the
quantile τ̂i = (τi−1 + τi )/2 for 1 ≤ i ≤ N .
Zθ (s, a) =

N
1 X
δθ (s,a)
N i=1 i

ρκτ (u) = |τ − δ{u<0} |(Lκ (u)/κ),
 1 2
if |u| ≤ κ
2u ,
where Lκ (u) =
κ(|u| − 12 κ), otherwise

(6)

(7)

During each training step, {θi (s, a)} are optimized by performing stochastic gradient decent on the quantile regression
loss LQR , which is computed with quantile TD error δij and
quantile Huber loss ρκτ .
δij = r + γθj (s′ , πα (s′ )) − θi (s, a)
LQR =

N
X

Ej [ρκτ̂i (δij )]

(2)

G ⪰(2) G′ ⇐⇒ FG (z) ≤ FG′ (z), ∀ z ∈ R.

𝑎𝑡 =
𝜋𝜓 (𝑍(𝑠,⋅; 𝜃))

(8)
(9)

(11)

The function F (2) defines the frontier of what is known as the
dispersion space, whose volume reflects the degree to which
a random variable differs from its expected value. Outcomes
that are disperse have more uncertainty and are less robust
when it comes to realizing consistent outcomes. Indeed, a
fundamental result from expected utility theory states that
rational risk-averse agents prefer outcome G to G′ when
G ⪰(2) G′ [18].
We consider the SSD policy as an execution policy, which
is based on the SSD relation. In settings where there is
not an exact tie among the actions offering the largest
expected returns, the SSD policy will be equivalent to the
standard greedy policy. Otherwise, the SSD policy selects
the action that is second-order stochastically dominant. Here
we also introduce a relaxation to the SSD policy that permits
uncertainty to be considered even when there is not an exact
tie. The Thresholded SSD policy looks at the action gap
between the top two optimal actions. When this is less than
a certain threshold they will be considered equivalent, and
the tie will be broken with a comparison of their second
central moments, which eliminates the difference in expected
values and is consistent with the exact SSD policy—namely,
the action that induces the smaller second central moment
will be preferred. Details of the SSD and Thresholded SSD
policies are shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 SSD and Thresholded SSD policy
Require: use thres , ssd thres
for all a ∈ APdo
N
Qa = N1 i=1 θi (s, a)
// Identify top-2 actions with largest Q values
a1 = argmaxa {Qa }, a2 = argmaxa {Qa \Qa1 }
if use thres is true then
// Thresholded SSD
if Qa1 − Qa2 > ssd thres then
return a1
else
PN
Va = N1 i=1 (θi (s, a) − Qa )2 , a ∈ {a1 , a2 }
return argmina Va
else
// Exact SSD
if Qa1 > Qa2 then
return a1
else
PN
Va = N1 i=1 θi (s, a)2 , a ∈ {a1 , a2 }
return argmina Va

i=1

We use the greedy policy as the learning policy in optimization.
πα (s) = argmaxa Ez∼Zθ (s,a) [z]
(10)
B. Execution
In stochastic environments where a robot can experience
multiple and potentially negative outcomes, it can be beneficial to impose an additional preference over outcomes so they
are robust. Robustness here is specified with the dispersion
of a given return distribution, and in the past it has been
measured with statistics of the return distribution such as
the variance [15] or Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) [16].
Martin et al. [17] showed that policies based on the secondorder stochastic dominance (SSD) relation are aggregations
of CVaR policies, and these can lead to optimal behaviors
that favor robustness when multiple solutions exist.
289

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3: Left: CARLA Town01 map and the extracted graph. Discrete states and actions are shown as green dots and black arrow-head
lines. Right: an observation sample. A learning system observes an occupancy image whose pixels correspond to the presence of a
LIDAR return within a specific block of space. The image is overlaid on top of the corresponding 3D scene.

V. T HE S TOCHASTIC ROAD N ETWORK E NVIRONMENT
To examine the performance of the proposed framework
on the urban driving route planning problem, we develop a
simulation environment called the Stochastic Road Network
Environment. The environment is built upon map topology
and simulated sensory data originating from the CARLA
autonomous vehicle simulator [19]. We select two maps from
CARLA (0.9.6 version), Town01 and Town02.
Each map in the proposed environment is procedurally
generated. Starting from the continuous OpenDRIVE maps
provided alongside CARLA, maps are extracted through a
discretization process that produces a graph approximating
the route-level topology of the original CARLA maps. The
waypoint topology is initially represented in the OpenDRIVE
road description format [20]—an industry-standard description language of road networks for use in autonomous vehicle
simulation. The generation procedure produces maps with
an offline data pre-processing script, which communicates
with the CARLA simulator and generates static map graphs
and observational data. For instance, the graph extracted
for the CARLA Town01 road network is visualized in
Figure 3. Given the extensibility of the CARLA simulator
framework, the proposed environment generation method can
be extended to cover any custom-made CARLA maps that
include an underlying OpenDRIVE map graph.
A. State and Action Space
Each map in the proposed environment is a discrete and
directed road network graph, where the state space is the set
of all vertices in the graph representing all possible locations
that the robot could visit.
The available actions at each state are determined by a discrete map of candidate state transitions, which correspond to
edges in the graph. The dimension of the action space in the
map is the largest number of available actions in any state.
At states where the graph topology does not allow for use of
the full action space (i.e., in the case of a straightaway, where
there is only one valid direction of travel) the remainder of

the action space corresponds to the loopback action, whereby
the agent re-transitions into its current state. State transitions
are fully deterministic, meaning every state-action pair yields
a transition to a deterministic subsequent state.
B. Observation
The CARLA simulator provides access to an array of
rich sensor data-types. In this work, rich 3D LIDAR data is
extracted from the CARLA simulator and post-processed into
a form more amenable to usage with reinforcement learning
methods.
First, raw returns from a 32-beam, 360◦ FoV simulated 3D
LIDAR are extracted at each state location in the original
CARLA environment. Next, this data is collected into a
simple occupancy-map format on a per-state-basis, whereby
the number of LIDAR returns per grid-cell are counted and
stored in a 3D grid structure. This grid structure posesses a
dimensionality of 255×255×3, and a size of 50 m×50 m×
8.4 m, with individual voxels of size 0.2m × 0.2m × 2.7m.
Finally, a single 2D slice of this grid structure (255 × 255)
is extracted for use as the environment observation at each
environment state. The final observation is binarized, yielding a 2-dimensional matrix of size 255 × 255. Each cell is
populated with a value of 1 if a non-zero number of LIDAR
returns were present within the corresponding occupancy
voxel, and 0 otherwise. A representation of the resulting
observation format is shown in Figure 3.
When the learning agent reaches a state, it perceives the
corresponding observation matrix at that location. In this paper, we are focused on studying how route planning policies
are affected by the environmental stochasticity induced by
crosswalks where a vehicle may need to stop for pedestrians.
Thus, observation noise is not modeled, and observation
data is non-stochastic, with each binary matrix representing
a static, unchanging observation returned from a specified
state. Subsequent revisiting of a given state will always yield
the same observation.
290

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Town01

(b) Town02

(a) Town01

(b) Town02

Fig. 4: Learning performance of Deep RL algorithms (Baselines
Study). Each solid line shows the variation of mean path returns
during evaluations, and the bandwidth indicates the standard error
of path returns over 30 trials. Black lines indicate the discounted
return of the shortest path in each map.

Fig. 5: Sensitivity curves of Deep RL algorithms (Baselines
Study). Each point in a curve represents the mean value of area
under the learning curve over the corresponding five experiments,
and the vertical bar at each point reflects the standard error. The
points with maximum mean value are marked by stars.

C. Reward

A. Baselines Study

Rewards are designed to reflect the travel time cost of
passing states, and they are summarized in Equation (12). As
most vertices are generated with fixed distances to neighbouring vertices, a fixed base action reward is present at all states
to reflect the normal travel time cost, yielding a deterministic
reward of −rbase . In addition to this fixed action reward,
there exist three categories of reward modifiers: goal states,
crosswalk states, and loopback actions.
Goal states, denoted as SG , are destinations of the agent,
and reaching a goal state results in the end of a route and an
additional reward +rbase . Hence, the total reward of reaching
a goal state is 0.
Crosswalk states, denoted as SC , are the sole source
of stochasticity within the environment, where travel time
varies. We impose an additional reward sampled from a
zero-mean truncated Gaussian distribution with a standard
deviation of 1 and threshold bounds of −rbase to +rbase .
Thus the total reward of reaching a crosswalk state range
from −2rbase to 0.
Loopback actions are actions which result in the agent
remaining in its current state. Loopback actions may incur
an additional penalty rloopback , resulting in an effective
loopback action reward of −(rbase + rloopback ).

0,
if st ∈ SG



N (−rbase , 1) & rt ∈ [−2rbase , 0], if st ∈ SC
rt =
−(rbase + rloopback ),
if st = st−1



−rbase ,
otherwise
(12)

We select four state-of-the-art Deep RL methods, which
are A2C [21], PPO [22], DQN [23], and Quantile-Regression
DQN (QR-DQN) [14], and investigate their performance on
the Stochastic Road Network Environment. In each map,
a start state, a pair of goal states (permitting the goal to
be reached from either side of a two-way street), and a
crosswalk state (designed to lie within the shortest path of
the map) are provided. The base reward rbase = 1, and
the penalty on the loopback actions rloopback = 0. Agents
equipped with the selected methods are trained to learn
route planning policies from the start state to a goal state,
which are represented by end-to-end multilayer perceptron
(MLP) models with the same structure introduced below.
We evaluate a trained agent after every 10,000 steps of
learning in the training environment. An evaluation occurs in
a separate environment instance, where the agent starts from
the same start state and stops when reaching a goal state or
1000 steps. The curves of discounted return (γ = 0.99) over
the trajectories executed during evaluation, shown in Figure
4, can be used to analyze the learning performance of an
agent.
We use implementations of A2C, PPO, DQN and QRDQN from the Stable-Baselines3 project [24], and the variable names of hyperparameters used hereafter are the same
as in the Stable-Baselines3 code.
Hyperparameter selection: Several hyperparameters
were tuned for our experiments, described in detail below.
For A2C, n step = 64. This means the agent collects 64
on-policy transitions before updating the policy. All collected
transitions are used to perform a one-step optimization to
update the current policy, and then they are subsequently
abandoned.
For PPO, n step = 2048, batch size = 64, and n epochs =
1. Thus the agent acts for 2048 steps with the current policy,
and then the policy is updated by performing a one-step
optimization with 64 samples randomly selected from 2048
collected transitions. Similar to the A2C agent, all n step
transitions are abandoned after every policy update.
For DQN, buffer size = 2048, batch size = 64, and gradient step = 1. In contrast to A2C and PPO, DQN is off-policy,
and we use the default ϵ-greedy policy for exploration.

VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
Using the Stochastic Road Network Environment, we
study the route planning performance of our proposed framework, as well as that of state-of-the-art RL algorithms for
comparison. Specifically, in section VI-A, we investigate
the effect of different learning rates on the performance of
selected state-of-the-art methods, and report our hyperparameter selection. In section VI-B, we apply the proposed
framework to the route planning task, and compare its
performance with others.

291
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

During training, it keeps a buffer of transitions obtained with
previous policies and updates the current policy with minibatches from its replay buffer. The chosen hyperparameters
indicate that a one-step optimization with 64 samples from
the buffer containing 2048 previous transitions is performed
to update the current policy. In this way, DQN is comparably
parameterized with A2C and PPO.
For QR-DQN, we chose n quantiles = 4, meaning 4
atoms are used to represent the return distribution of a
given action. We also set exploration fraction = 0.02 and
exploration final eps = 0.1, meaning that the exploration rate
of the ϵ-greedy policy starts at 1 and decreases linearly to
0.1 during the initial 2% of total training time steps, then
stays at 0.1 thereafter; buffer size = 2048, batch size = 64,
gradient step = 1.
Policy network structure: The route planning policy
is represented by a fully-connected multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) with four layers. The input layer takes a vector
of the size 65,025 obtained by flattening the observation
matrix. Next, there are two sequential hidden layers, each of
which has 64 neurons. For A2C, PPO and DQN, the output
layer gives estimated Q value of actions; for QR-DQN, the
output layer gives gives quantile points reflecting the return
distribution of actions. The action that maximizes estimated
Q value or expected value of the return distribution is chosen
as the final output.
We study the effect of different learning rates on the performance of the agents in each map. The range of examined
learning rates is from 1 × 10−6 to 1 × 10−3 . For each agent
and learning rate value, five trials with different random seeds
are run, and the mean area under the learning curves over
the trials is computed and used as a metric for evaluating the
learning performance at each learning rate – the results are
shown in Figure 5. The learning rates corresponding to the
maximum mean area under the curve values are marked by
stars, and summarized in Table I. Then for each agent in each
map, we run another 25 trials with different random seeds,
and plot the general performance over 30 trials in Figure 4.
Town01
Town02

A2C
9 × 10−5
8 × 10−5

PPO
2 × 10−4
3 × 10−4

DQN
1 × 10−4
5 × 10−6

QR-DQN
6 × 10−4
6 × 10−5

TABLE I: Best learning rates of Deep RL agents in Baselines Study

Four agents learn planning policies that lead to the shortest
path within about 5 × 105 steps of experience in most trials
in Town01, and about 2×105 steps in Town02. In both maps,
A2C and PPO achieve the best learning performance when
the learning rate is around 1 × 10−4 , while that of DQN and
QR-DQN are not significantly affected by the learning rate.
As the expected reward of a crosswalk state is −rbase , which
is the same as other states with a deterministic reward, agents
learning greedy policies are agnostic to its stochasticity.
B. Robust Route Planning under Uncertainty
Based on the results of Section VI-A, the learning rate
we choose for each agent is shown in Table II, and other

(b) Town02

(a) Town01

Fig. 6: Learning performance of evaluated algorithms (Robust
Route Planning). Noisy Path denotes the shortest path, which
passes through the crosswalk state. In the Town01 plot, Robust Path
denotes the second shortest path, which circumvents the crosswalk
state. In the Town02 plot, an additional Robust Path is also shown,
which is actually the third shortest path.

hyperparameters remain the same as those in Section VIA. We also include the proposed Robust Learning and Execution framework into the experiment, with three execution
policies: (1) Greedy (default policy in QR-DQN); (2) SSD;
(3) Thresholded SSD (denoted as T-SSD in figures). For the
Thresholded SSD policy, we choose ssd thres = 5 · rbase .
A2C
1 × 10−4

PPO
1 × 10−4

DQN
1 × 10−4

QR-DQN
5 × 10−4

TABLE II: Learning rates of Deep RL agents in Robust Route
Planning Study

We use the same start state, goal states and crosswalk
state as those used in the baselines study. The base reward
rbase = 3. As we are concerned with the effect of crosswalk
stochasticity on route planning, a positive penalty on the
loopback actions rloopback = 18 is used. In this experiment,
we use a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model for the
planning policies. Similar to the baselines study, evaluation is
performed in a separate environment after every 10,000 steps
of learning. We run 30 trials with different seeds for each
map, and plot the overall performance of each algorithm in
Figure 6. We also plot the planned route of each algorithm
during the final evaluation in Figure 7 and Figure 8.
Policy network structure: The route planning policy
is represented by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
model with the following structure. The input is the observation matrix, of size 255 × 255 × 1. The first hidden layer
convolves 16 filters of the size 8 × 8 with stride 4 with
the input, followed by a rectifier. The second hidden layer
convolves 32 filters of the size 4 × 4 with stride 2, followed
by a rectifier. The third hidden layer convolves 64 filters of
the size 4 × 4 with stride 2, followed by a rectifier. The
fourth hidden layer convolves 64 filters of the size 3 × 3
with stride 1, followed by a rectifier. Two sequential fullyconnected layers, each of which has 64 neurons, follow that.
Similarly, the output layer gives the estimated Q values of
actions (A2C, PPO and DQN) or quantile points reflecting
the return distribution of actions (QR-DQN). Note that for
a QR-DQN agent, the output action is determined by its
execution policy.
It can be seen that the results over the two maps are
similar. We note that when equipped with the Thresholded
292

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7: Planned routes of evaluated algorithms during the final evaluation in Town01 (Robust Route Planning). We also zoom in
on the area where the Noisy path and the Robust Path diverge (Red rectangle box), and draw the critical state and its actions in red. In
the action return distributions, red crosses mark learned quantiles, the central vertical bar marks the mean, and the distance between the
central bar and a lateral short bar equals the variance.

Fig. 8: Planned routes of evaluated algorithms during the final evaluation in Town02 (Robust Route Planning). QR-DQN (T-SSD)
plans the second shortest path (Robust Path 1) in 25 trials, and it selects the third shortest path (Robust Path 2) in 5 trials. The action
return distributions of critical states 1 and 2 come from a trial that chooses Robust Path 1.

SSD policy, our proposed framework is the only one that
learns to execute a high-quality robust route, which avoids
travel time stochasticity and is still short in length. In
Town02, the second and the third shortest paths are both
free of stochasticity, and very close in length, thus it is
relatively slow for the algorithm to learn to move from the
third shortest path to the second second path. We denote the
second and the third shortest path in Town02 as Robust Path
1 and Robust Path 2, respectively.
For our Town01 results (shown in Figure 7), besides

the planned paths, we also show the return distributions
of actions (learned by QR-DQN) at the critical state after
which the Noisy path and the Robust Path diverge. It can be
seen that the action leading to the Noisy path has a higher
expected return but a greater variance, hence the Thresholded
SSD policy favors the other action with less variance, while
the expected return is still within the SSD threshold.
For our Town02 results (shown in Figure 8), we draw
the action return distributions for two critical states. Critical
1 decides whether to take the Robust Path 2 or the
state ⃝
293

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2 decides whether to take
Noisy Path, and critical state ⃝
Robust Path 1 or the other two. It could be seen that at
1 the difference in variances is large, hence
critical state ⃝,
the proposed framework quickly learns to avoid taking the
2 is more distant from
Noisy path. However, critical state ⃝
and less affected by the crosswalk state, and the variance
of the final learned distributions of both actions are quite
close and small. Hence, this explains why the learning curve
of QR-DQN (T-SSD) in Figure 6b converges slowly from
Robust Path 2 to Robust Path 1.
The Greedy policy is agnostic to environment stochasticity,
so it takes the Noisy Path in all trials. Because there are no
exact ties in expectation, the SSD policy exhibits identical
behavior to Greedy. As the Thresholded SSD policy plans a
robust path at the price of a longer expected travel time, the
user may select the stricter SSD policy if robustness is less
preferred. DQN also learns a greedy policy that selects the
shortest paths in both maps.
However, A2C and PPO fail to learn a route to the goal
in both maps, and it can be seen that they become stuck
in loops. It is likely because they are on-policy algorithms,
which may converge to a local optimal solution before
sufficient exploration. Additionally, the penalty on the loopback action also leads to bias towards the other action and
contributes to A2C and PPO converging to locally optimal
solutions.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces the Robust Learning and Execution
framework for the route planning problem of mobile robots
in unknonwn and stochastic environments. The framework
learns environmental stochasticity with QR-DQN, and could
use different execution policies according to user preferences
on route robustness. We use the SSD policy, which is based
on the second-order stochastic dominance (SSD) relation,
to determine robust actions during execution, and we introduce a relaxation, the Thresholded SSD policy, that allows
further preferences on robustness. Experimental results on a
simulated road network environment show that our proposed
framework could achieve adjustable performance with different execution policies: (1) Due to no strict tie in expected
returns, the SSD policy selects routes that minimize expected
travel time but with higher stochasticity; (2) When equipped
with the Thresholded SSD policy, our framework could select
short robust routes with minimum stochasticity in travel time,
at the cost of higher expected travel time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Office of Naval
Research, grant N00014-20-1-2570.
R EFERENCES
[1] N. Roy, I. Posner, T. Barfoot, P. Beaudoin, Y. Bengio, J. Bohg,
O. Brock, I. Depatie, D. Fox, D. Koditschek, et al., From machine
learning to robotics: Challenges and opportunities for embodied intelligence, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2110.15245.
[2] E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, K. Takeda, A survey of
autonomous driving: Common practices and emerging technologies,
IEEE access 8 (2020) 58443–58469.

[3] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction,
MIT press, 2018.
[4] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
et al., Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,
Nature 518 (7540) (2015) 529–533.
[5] M. G. Bellemare, W. Dabney, R. Munos, A distributional perspective
on reinforcement learning, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR, 2017, pp. 449–458.
[6] T. Qian, C. Shao, X. Wang, M. Shahidehpour, Deep reinforcement
learning for ev charging navigation by coordinating smart grid and
intelligent transportation system, IEEE transactions on smart grid
11 (2) (2019) 1714–1723.
[7] Q. Zhang, K. Wu, Y. Shi, Route planning and power management for
phevs with reinforcement learning, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 69 (5) (2020) 4751–4762.
[8] Y. Geng, E. Liu, R. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Rao, S. Feng, Z. Dong, Z. Fu,
Y. Chen, Deep reinforcement learning based dynamic route planning
for minimizing travel time, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[9] S. Koh, B. Zhou, H. Fang, P. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Yang, L. Guan,
Z. Ji, Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle navigation,
Applied Soft Computing 96 (2020) 106694.
[10] R. Basso, B. Kulcsár, I. Sanchez-Diaz, X. Qu, Dynamic stochastic
electric vehicle routing with safe reinforcement learning, Transportation research part E: logistics and transportation review 157 (2022)
102496.
[11] J. Choi, C. Dance, J.-e. Kim, S. Hwang, K.-s. Park, Risk-conditioned
distributional soft actor-critic for risk-sensitive navigation, in: 2021
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
IEEE, 2021, pp. 8337–8344.
[12] D. Kamran, T. Engelgeh, M. Busch, J. Fischer, C. Stiller, Minimizing
safety interference for safe and comfortable automated driving with
distributional reinforcement learning, in: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1236–1243.
[13] C. Liu, E.-J. van Kampen, G. C. de Croon, Adaptive risk tendency:
Nano drone navigation in cluttered environments with distributional
reinforcement learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14749 (2022).
[14] W. Dabney, M. Rowland, M. Bellemare, R. Munos, Distributional
reinforcement learning with quantile regression, in: Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 32, 2018.
[15] A. Tamar, D. Di Castro, S. Mannor, Temporal difference methods
for the variance of the reward to go, in: International Conference on
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2013, pp. 495–503.
[16] R. Keramati, C. Dann, A. Tamkin, E. Brunskill, Being optimistic to
be conservative: Quickly learning a cvar policy, in: Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 34, 2020, pp.
4436–4443.
[17] J. Martin, M. Lyskawinski, X. Li, B. Englot, Stochastically dominant
distributional reinforcement learning, in: International Conference on
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 6745–6754.
[18] D. Dentcheva, A. Ruszczyński, Inverse stochastic dominance constraints and rank dependent expected utility theory, Mathematical
Programming 108 (2) (2006) 297–311.
[19] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, V. Koltun, Carla:
An open urban driving simulator, in: Conference on robot learning,
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[20] M. Dupuis, M. Strobl, H. Grezlikowski, Opendrive 2010 and beyond–
status and future of the de facto standard for the description of road
networks, in: Proc. of the Driving Simulation Conference Europe,
2010, pp. 231–242.
[21] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, K. Kavukcuoglu, Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning (2016). arXiv:1602.01783.
[22] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proximal
policy optimization algorithms (2017). arXiv:1707.06347.
[23] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D. Wierstra, M. Riedmiller, Playing atari with deep reinforcement
learning (2013). arXiv:1312.5602.
[24] A. Raffin, A. Hill, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, M. Ernestus, N. Dormann, Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations, Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (268) (2021) 1–8.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html

294
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

