applied
sciences
Article

Routing Control Optimization for Autonomous Vehicles in
Mixed Traffic Flow Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning
Sungwon Moon 1 , Seolwon Koo 1 , Yujin Lim 2
1

2

3

*

and Hyunjin Joo 3, *

Department of IT Engineering, Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul 04310, Republic of Korea;
sungwon268@sookmyung.ac.kr (S.M.); tjrgkr501@sookmyung.ac.kr (S.K.)
Division of Artificial Intelligence Engineering, Sookmyung Women’s University,
Seoul 04310, Republic of Korea; yujin91@sookmyung.ac.kr
Department of Highway & Transportation Research, Korea Institute of Civil Engineering and Building
Technology, Goyang 10223, Republic of Korea
Correspondence: hjinjoo8@kict.re.kr

Abstract: With recent technological advancements, the commercialization of autonomous vehicles
(AVs) is expected to be realized soon. However, it is anticipated that a mixed traffic of AVs and
human-driven vehicles (HVs) will persist for a considerable period until the Market Penetration
Rate reaches 100%. During this phase, AVs and HVs will interact and coexist on the roads. Such an
environment can cause unpredictable and dynamic traffic conditions due to HVs, which results in
traffic problems including traffic congestion. Therefore, the routes of AVs must be controlled in a
mixed traffic environment. This study proposes a multi-objective vehicle routing control method
using a deep Q-network to control the driving direction at intersections in a mixed traffic environment.
The objective is to distribute the traffic flow and control the routes safely and efficiently to their
destination. Simulation results showed that the proposed method outperformed existing methods in
terms of the driving distance, time, and waiting time of AVs, particularly in more dynamic traffic
environments. Consequently, the traffic became smooth as it moved along optimal routes.
Keywords: vehicle routing control; deep reinforcement learning; deep Q-network; autonomous
vehicle; traffic flow
Citation: Moon, S.; Koo, S.; Lim, Y.;
Joo, H. Routing Control Optimization
for Autonomous Vehicles in Mixed
Traffic Flow Based on Deep
Reinforcement Learning. Appl. Sci.
2024, 14, 2214. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app14052214
Academic Editor: Suchao Xie
Received: 2 February 2024
Revised: 29 February 2024
Accepted: 1 March 2024
Published: 6 March 2024

Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of information communication and artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies, autonomous driving technologies have attracted considerable attention
as the core of future mobility. Autonomous vehicles (AVs) refer to cars that can drive
independently without direct driver manipulation. Autonomous driving technology is
classified into six levels (levels 0–5), and levels 3–5 are generally classified as AVs [1]. AVs
can actively drive, and they can avoid potential risks by receiving information about the
surrounding road conditions and nearby vehicles through Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication. AVs have demonstrated positive effects in
the context of various perspectives such as road safety, traffic capacity, and mobility [2].
Moreover, AVs can potentially solve traffic-related problems, such as traffic congestion.
South Korea is currently in the demonstration stage, with the goal of commercializing
Level 4 autonomous driving by 2027. The annual growth rate of the AV-related industry in
North America, Western Europe, and the Asia–Pacific region is anticipated to be about 85%
from 2020 to 2035 [3]. In addition, the Market Penetration Rate (MPR) of AVs is expected to
reach approximately 75% by the year 2035. In the autonomous driving environment, it is
anticipated that mixed traffic of AVs and human-driven vehicles (HVs) will persist for a
considerable period until the MPR reaches 100% [4]. During this transitional phase, AVs
and HVs will interact and coexist on the roads. The coexistence of AVs and HVs in a traffic

4.0/).

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14052214

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

2 of 14

environment has the potential to induce unstable traffic flow, thus negatively impacting
safety by increasing the frequency and severity of traffic accidents [5].
Therefore, to optimize traffic flow in a mixed traffic system, high-level decision making
in AVs is essential as it can ensure that both AVs and HVs reach their destinations safely
and efficiently. One of the major challenges in the high-level decision making of AVs
is the vehicle routing problem (VRP) [6,7], which significantly influences traffic safety
and efficiency. Research on VRP, which aims to find efficient routes to destinations, has
been extensively conducted; however, these studies have been insufficient in considering
mixed traffic systems. In a mixed traffic system, HVs are likely to cause unpredictable
and dynamic traffic conditions because they are driven by humans. Consequently, as HVs
bring unknown/uncertain behaviors, planning, and control in such mixed traffic systems,
achieving safe and efficient maneuvers is challenging [8]. Therefore, efficient methods for
controlling the routing of AVs while considering mixed traffic environments of AVs and
HVs are needed.
However, there is a limit to AV routing control when using deep learning in a dynamic
environment that changes in real time. In other words, a large amount of labeled data is
required to achieve good results with deep learning. However, it is difficult to generate
such data for the complex decision-making process of autonomous driving when using
deep learning. Therefore, it is crucial to demonstrate how to process these decisions without
using explicitly labeled data or predefined rules. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is a
potential machine learning method that can address this problem.
Therefore, we propose a DRL method that utilizes a deep Q-network (DQN) [9] for AV
route control. This method features a novel local reward design that incorporates safety and
efficiency. Additionally, the AVs learn policies to alleviate traffic congestion by reflecting
local information such as real-time traffic. The AVs aim to make necessary route control
for efficiency improvement while ensuring safe traffic movement in a mixed traffic system.
The contributions of this study can be summarized as follows:

•

•
•

We formulate a model of vehicle routing control that reflects real-time local information
in mixed traffic as a decentralized problem, where agents learn a safe and efficient
driving policy to distribute traffic flow and improve efficiency.
We proposed a novel, efficient, and scalable routing control model by introducing an
effective reward function design.
We conduct comparative experiments on various MPR values and traffic densities, as
well as demonstrate the model in terms of driving safety and efficiency compared to
other conventional models.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the related
studies. Section 3 describes the vehicle routing control method using a DQN. Section 4
discusses the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 presents the main conclusions of
this study.
2. Related Works
In this section, we introduce conventional studies on vehicle routing control to solve
the VRP. Many studies have been conducted to find the optimal route from the origin to the
destination for the purpose of achieving a minimum distance, minimum cost, or minimum
driving time [10–12]. These studies generally used metaheuristic algorithms, including
particle swarm optimization (PSO), a genetic algorithm (GA), and ant colony optimization
(ACO). In [10], the authors used the PSO algorithm to minimize carbon emissions, waiting
times, and the number of vehicles. PSO is an optimization algorithm in which particles
(simple entities forming a cluster) share their experiences in finding a solution to a problem.
The vehicle load and driving distance were modeled to achieve these objectives. The
study in [11] addressed the vehicle routing problem using a GA, which determines optimal
solutions by imitating the evolution of organisms as they adapt to their environment. The
objective was to minimize the total driving distance of vehicles with capacity and distance
constraints. In addition, the study of [12] proposed energy-efficient vehicle-optimized

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

3 of 14

routing, which utilized the ACO (expressed by the energy consumption and speed of
an AV) to maximize energy efficiency. However, these vehicle routing methods, such
as navigation systems that find the optimal distance from the origin to the destination,
may inadvertently cause temporary traffic congestion by suggesting similar routes when
neighboring vehicles have the same destination. These methods make decisions based on
global information for global optimization, which may hinder their ability to quickly adapt
to changes in road conditions or traffic due to insufficient real-time traffic updates.
Therefore, to alleviate traffic congestion, it requires not only global decisions, but
also local decisions that enable real-time route updates based on current traffic volume.
Existing studies have introduced methods for controlling vehicle routes that make local
decisions based on real-time local traffic information, which can be mainly classified
into two categories: lane changing and direction changing. Local traffic information
reflects not only the current state, but also the localized conditions and factors related
to the surroundings. By leveraging this information, agents can better understand their
surrounding environment and respond appropriately to the state. This intelligent behavior
combines the right choices for the current state in which the surroundings are considered,
thus ultimately leading to global optimality.
First of all, a lane changing approach aims to enable vehicles to safely and quickly
reach their destinations by controlling the lane changing within the same direction of
driving at the edge level of roads. Many DRL-based methods have been proposed for the
purpose of learn lane changing behavior based on real-time local information such as the
state of nearby vehicles, [13–16]. The studies have focused on training AVs to intelligently
perform lane changing. In [13,14], the authors proposed a lane changing method that
determines whether to change lanes for a safe, smooth, and efficient lane changing. In [15],
the authors proposed a method to determine whether to keep the current lane, change
it to the right lane, or change it to the left lane for high-speed driving. In addition, a
method for determining acceleration and deceleration beyond lane changing has also been
proposed [16]. However, lane changing is aimed at ensuring efficient and safe driving at
the edge level of roads, i.e., controlling lane changes within the same route and direction of
driving. In other words, lane changing usually involves controlling lanes without altering
the overall route, thus not effectively distributing the overall traffic flow and congestion.
Therefore, from a microscopic perspective, it requires direction changing to distribute
the route by controlling the driving direction at the node level of the road, which is
an intersection. This reduces traffic congestion and allows the vehicles to reach their
destination quickly and efficiently. For instance, in the case of a four-way intersection,
it is to determine the driving direction for a left turn, a right turn, or a straight one by
considering the real-time local traffic situation of the intersection. In [17], the authors
proposed a method using Q-learning, which is a type of RL that considers the location
change information and vehicle kinematic constraints to optimize the path of a vehicle by
changing the driving direction in a dynamic environment. Furthermore, the study in [18]
proposed a Q-learning-based method to avoid congestion paths and to optimize the routes
of vehicles. The authors modeled it as a scoring system based on the edge when controlling
the driving direction after the vehicle has entered. However, Q-learning suffers from the
curse of dimensionality due to storing states and actions in a table format, thus making it
impractical for dealing with high-dimensional states and actions. In dynamic and complex
environments like traffic scenarios, Q-learning can lead to the curse of dimensionality and
reduced efficiency. Therefore, to address these issues, applying DRL techniques such as
DQN is more suitable.
In [19], a DQN-based method was proposed to optimize the routes of vehicles and
minimize their travel time. The reward function was modeled as the total travel time with
a single objective. In [20], a DQN-based method was proposed to optimize the routes to
destinations by determining the driving directions at intersections. Factors such as driving
distance, driving time, and the design of reward functions with a single objective were
compared and analyzed for their strengths, weaknesses, and performance. However, there

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

4 of 14

is no advantage in minimizing a single objective such as driving time when using DRL.
These methods may be simplistic and overly focused on a single goal, thereby making it
difficult to adapt to various situations and potentially leading to performance degradation.
Therefore, this study aims to introduce effective reward function designs with multiple
objectives to facilitate smooth traffic flow. Considering multiple objectives allows the
system to adapt flexibly to various situations and develop optimal strategies. This approach
is expected to harmonize conflicting objectives and improve future predictions, thereby
enhancing the exploration of the agent. Therefore, unlike existing studies, this paper
proposes a vehicle routing control method with multiple goals rather than a single goal.
Overall, the studies on vehicle routing control have not considered mixed traffic
environments significantly. The methods considering mixed traffic systems have been
mainly implemented to ensure that AVs move safely in facing the uncertainty of HVs.
The study in [21] proposed a trajectory planning and control method for AVs that allows
AVs to move safely while avoiding static vehicles, whereas in [22], the authors proposed a
motion planning method to plan a route that allows AVs to move safely in mixed traffic
environments. In addition, in [23], the authors proposed an adaptive optimal control
method that considers HV interaction and heterogeneous driver behavior for a platoon
mixed with HVs and an AV. Therefore, in considering an uncertain and dynamic mixed
traffic environment, we aim to reflect a more realistic scenario. Based on local information
such as AVs and HVs, we propose a direction changing method to ensure the safe and
efficient operation of AVs.
Therefore, in this paper, we proposed a DRL-based DQN method to distribute traffic
flow by controlling the driving direction at intersections in real time, thereby reflecting local
information such as traffic conditions and the state of AVs and HVs. We formulate the local
decision making of AVs on direction changing in mixed traffic environments, where a multiobjective reward function is proposed to improve safety and efficiency simultaneously.
The experimental results on different traffic densities and MPR values showed that the
proposed method performs well in various scenarios.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we review the preliminaries of DQN and formulate the routing control
problem by controlling the driving direction at intersections as a Markov decision process
(MDP). Then, we present the proposed method featuring an efficient reward function
design to solve the formulated MDP.
The routing control problem can be defined as an MDP, which comprises a set of states
S, a set of actions A, and an immediate reward r. Given the current state s ∈ S, the agent
selects an action a ∈ A to maximize the long-term cumulative reward R. Consequently,
the agent aims to make optimal decisions in routing control. To address this problem,
we utilized DQN, which is a value function-based DRL method that can effectively solve
discrete action space problems. The network is trained by minimizing the loss function,
which is denoted as L(θ ), as follows:
h
i
L(θ ) = E (y − Q(s, a|θ ))2 ,
(1)
where y = r + γ max Q(s′ , a′ |θ ′ ) is the target Q-value, and Q(s, a|θ ) is the predicted Qa′

value. The DQN network learns by minimizing the mean squared error (MSE) between
the target Q-value and predicted Q-value, as well as by periodically updating θ ′ to θ. The
Q-function equation for DQN is defined as Q(s, a) = r + γmaxQ(s′ , a′ ), where γ represents
the discount factor when adjusting the value of future rewards. DQN has a high correlation
because it collects the data sequentially over time in an environment. Therefore, to solve
the problem, experience replay is applied, which is a method of storing the experience and
configuring a mini batch to randomly select the experience to learn. This can reduce the
high correlation between the data and increase the data reliability.

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

5 of 14

The proposed method recognizes the traffic situation and determines the direction
to optimize the route based on the traffic situation. Traffic environments are dynamic
and complex, with traffic volumes changing in real time. Consequently, the routes of
vehicles are constantly changing and difficult to predict. This is especially the case in
mixed traffic environments, the continuous variation due to various factors leads to a high
likelihood of many possible states occurring. To address this, we utilized DQN, which
is capable of learning complex patterns and interactions in state and action spaces by
using neural networks. Additionally, DQN utilizes experience replay to efficiently utilize
past experiences in training, thereby enabling the effective utilization of training data and
ensuring stable learning even in high-dimensional state and action spaces. Furthermore,
DQN is well suited for discrete action spaces, thus making it suitable for determining
discrete actions such as driving directions.
The proposed method updates the routes to alleviate traffic congestion by distributing
the driving directions based on real-time local information at each intersection. Each AV is
considered a DRL agent and is defined by v ∈ {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn }, which allows the AVs to
interact with the environment and learn the policies to reach their destination. The goal of
each AV agent is to drive in a direction that changes toward the destination as quickly and
optimally as possible to achieve higher rewards.
As shown in Figure 1, a decision zone with a specified distance was defined on the
approach roads of each intersection. Within these zones, the driving direction of the AV at
the intersection was determined. Therefore, when an AV is in the decision zone, it derives
the observed state sn from the current traffic situation to form state space S. State sn is
entered into AV agent vn , which represents the current traffic observation. Subsequently,
AV agent vn performs action an based on the current state sn . Thereafter, the AV agent
receives the reward rn from the traffic environment. There were three components in the
MDP. These comprised a set of states S, a set of actions A, and an immediate reward r, and
they were defined as described below.

Figure 1. Architecture of the vehicle routing control method.

3.1. State
To control the driving direction of AVs at intersections for distributing traffic flow,
state sn was defined as an efficient representation of the current traffic conditions. The
expression variables describe the complexity of the dynamics and include several variables
reflecting the mixed traffic environment. The state sn observed by each AV agent vn is

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

6 of 14

defined as a matrix Nr × F , where Nr is the number of nearby roads and F is the number
AV and
of features, which is used to represent the current traffic conditions. It includes pn,r
HV
AV
HV
pn,r (which are the average driving speeds of AVs and HVs), and mn,r and mn,r (which
are the numbers of AVs and HVs driving on road e). Moreover, it includes the longitudinal
position and lateral position of the current and destination for the AV agent, and these are
represented as lncur and lndest . The state sn is defined in Equation (2):
i
h
AV
HV
AV
HV cur dest
sn = pn,r
, pn,r
, mn,r
, mn,r
, ln , ln .
(2)
3.2. Action
The action an of the AV agent represents a set of driving directions at the intersection,
including a left turn, a right turn, or a straight one, and it is determined in the decision zone
based on the observed state sn . However, the set of action is dependent on the structure of
the considered intersections. In this paper, we considered four-way intersections, thus the
possible directions are shown in Figure 2 and Equation (3).
a n = [ a0 , a1 , a2 ],

(3)

Figure 2. Possible actions for agents to choose from at a four-way intersection.

3.3. Reward
The proposed method distributes traffic flow by allowing each AV to reach its destination quickly and efficiently through an optimal control of the driving direction at
intersections. It was defined using the objective of the proposed method because the reward function is associated with the objective. Therefore, we designed the reward function
to include safety and efficiency.
With the premise of ensuring safety, vehicles should travel at a fast and stable speed;
for efficiency, the vehicles should minimize detours to the destination. Therefore, we
defined the reward function to maximize the driving speed of the AV dsn and minimize
the remaining driving distance to the destination ddn . The remaining driving distance is
calculated as the sum of the distances between the location of the AV and the destination.
The scale of dsn and ddn was normalized to values between 0 and 1. They were then applied
as the reward functions due to the following reasons: First, the driving speed incorporates
the information on both driving distance and time, with speed being inversely proportional
to both driving time and waiting time. Second, considering shorter driving distances helps
in reducing the number of AV detours to the destination. Therefore, the reward was defined
as given in Equation (3):
rn = ω ·dsn − (1 − ω )·ddn ,
(4)
where ω is a weighted parameter that adjusts the weight of the driving speed and distance.
An algorithm-based DQN is shown in Algorithm 1 and Figure 3.

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

7 of 14

Algorithm 1. DQN-based vehicle routing control method
Initialize main network Q(s, a|θ )
Initialize target network Q(s, a|θ ′ ) with weights θ ′ = θ
Initialize the experience replay buffer D
for each episode do
Initialize environment and state sn for each AV agent n ∈ N
for each agent n ∈ N do
if agent n in decision zone:
if random number ≤ ϵ:
Select action an randomly
else:
Select action an = argmaxQ(s, a; θ )
a

Execute the action an and receive reward rn
Store (sn , an , rn , sn ′ ) in D
Randomly
( sample a mini batch of samples from D
r
i f episode termiates
Set y = r + γ max Q(s′ , a′ |θ ′ )
otherwise
′
a

Update θ with gradient descent step via (1)
Regularly update θ ′ = θ

Figure 3. Framework of the DQN-based vehicle routing control method.

4. Performance Evaluation
We compared the performance of the proposed method with those of other methods.
The simulation was conducted using Python, PyTorch, and simulation of urban mobility
(SUMO) [24].
We conducted an experiment with the maps of City1 and City2, which were generated
using SUMO, as shown in Figure 4. These two cities were extracted from major roads
in parts of Seoul to help with considering real urban traffic environments. The length
of the road was at a minimum of 150 m and a maximum of 500 m. The figures on the
left in Figure 4a,b show photographs of the considered city, and those on the right show
photographs of the edge of the road on the map. Figure 4a shows a simple scenario with
fewer edges and intersections. This environment had fewer intersections; thus, there were
fewer decision zones. As the edges were long and the number of edges was small, fewer
environmental factors were required to be considered. Therefore, it was less dynamic
because the number of variables was reduced. Figure 4b shows a complex scenario with
many edges and intersections. Compared with the simple scenario, this environment was
very dynamic because of the shorter edge length, several decision zones, and numerous
variables. In each scenario, traffic conditions with different MPRs and traffic densities were
used to test the proposed method.

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

8 of 14

Figure 4. Seoul city map and road edge using SUMO. (a) City1, a simple scenario that considers
the real traffic urban environment. (b) City2, a complex scenario that considers the real traffic
urban environment.

The origin and destination of AVs and HVs were randomly set on the edge road of the
map. The AVs and HVs were distributed according to a Poisson distribution with different
maximum initial speeds of 15 m/s. The motion of the HVs followed the Intelligent Driver
Model (IDM) [25], where the maximum deceleration and acceleration for safety purposes
was limited to 5 m/s, and the politeness factor was 0. To evaluate the effectiveness of
the proposed method, various vehicle arrival rates that corresponded to vehicle density
and MPR values, which themselves corresponded with a mixed ratio of AVs and HVs,
were used.
The proposed method uses DQN, which consists of the following. The neural network
of DQN has four fully connected layers: an input layer, two hidden layers, and an output
layer. The first and second hidden layers had 150 and 100 neurons, respectively. A Rectified
Linear Unit (RELU) activation function was used for both hidden layers. The ReLU
function, defined as ReLU ( x ) = max (0, x ), is one of the most widely used nonlinear
activation functions for RL. The remaining parameters used in the simulations are listed
in Table 1.
Table 1. List of the hyperparameters.
Parameters

Value

Number of episodes
Batch size
Learning rate
Replay memory size (D)
Discount factor of long-term reward (γ)
Exploration (ϵ)

500
32
0.001
10,000
0.99
1 → 0.01

To evaluate the performance of the Proposed method, we leveraged two methods with
the reward parameters [20], which are defined as follows: the combination of driving speed
and accumulated driving distance (ds + ad), and the combination of driving speed and
the number of vehicles on the road (ds + nv). The method proposed in [19] is referred to

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

9 of 14

as Compare, where a reward function was designed with a single objective focusing on
driving time.
Figure 5 shows the effect of weights ω on the performance. The weight parameter ω
was used as the strategic parameter of the reward function, which resulted in a tradeoff
between the driving speed and distance of the AVs. To determine the optimal weight ω for
the driving speed and distance, we evaluated the performance by varying the weight ω.
In the following simulations, we set weight ω to 0.6, which focused slightly more on the
driving speed.

Figure 5. The driving speed and distance of AV depending on the weight value of the reward function.

Figure 6a,b show the average driving distance for AVs to reach their destinations
under different MPRs in City1 and City2, respectively. The MPR values are 30%, 50%, 70%,
and 90%, thus indicating the ratio of AVs in a mixed traffic environment. For instance, MPR
90 comprises 90% AVs and 10% HVs in a traffic environment. The AVs learn to optimize
their routes to the destination depending on the traffic situation; the higher the MPR, the
lower the driving distance of the AVs. Therefore, as the MPR increases, the number of
AVs learning the optimal route increases, thereby decreasing the driving distance to the
destination. It is evident that the performance difference between City1 and City2 was
relatively small. This was because it was less dynamic due to the fewer intersections and
decision zones.

Figure 6. The average driving distance for the different MPRs: (a) in City1 and (b) in City2.

Proposed yields increased the values in the approximate range of 12–25% in City1 and
7–15% in City2 in terms of the driving distance when compared with those of Compare and
ds + ad. This was because the number of detours decreased when the remaining driving
distance from the destination was considered. The reward model of Compare is expressed

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

10 of 14

in driving time, whereas the reward model of ds + ad is in terms of driving speed and
accumulated driving distance. Therefore, Compare and ds + ad are more likely to detour
because they choose a shorter driving time and distance, regardless of the distance to the
destination, when determining the route. In addition, the rewards for both Compare and
ds + ad include information on the driving time; however, the expressions for the reward
are slightly different. Compare is a single reward and ds + ad is a combination of driving time
and distance. These have different weights for the driving speed and distance. Compare
balances the driving speed and distances, whereas ds + ad is more focused on driving speed
than on driving distance. Therefore, ds + ad drives approximately 3–7% more of a distance
than Compare in City1 and City2. Furthermore, ds + nv exhibited the worst performance in
terms of driving distance. This is because the ds + nv model has more detour routes than
other methods as its model rewards driving speed and vehicle density without considering
the driving distance.
Table 2 presents the average driving speeds at which the AVs traveled to their destination in City1 and City2. Compare attempted to drive quickly to minimize travel time,
while the other three methods aimed to reduce the driving distance or vehicle density while
maintaining a high speed. This meant that all four methods had information about the
driving speed; thus, the performance difference was relatively small, i.e., about 1–6% in
City1 and City2. The driving speed also increased as the MPR increased. This was because
multiple AVs learn to drive along the optimal route based on traffic conditions. Despite
City1 having a smaller scale, its AV speed is approximately 13–15% slower than that of
City2 due to the higher vehicle density on its roads.
Table 2. Average driving speed in City1 and City2 (unit: m/s).
Compare

Proposed

ds + ad

ds + ds + nv

City1

7.29 ± 0.13

7.55 ± 0.11

7.31 ± 0.14

7.18 ± 0.13

City2

8.44 ± 0.19

8.89 ± 0.22

8.66 ± 0.25

8.3 ± 0.19

Figure 7a,b show the average driving time for AVs to reach their destinations under
different MPRs in City1 and City2. The figures illustrate that the driving time decreases
as the MPR increases. This indicates that the higher the number of AVs, the better the
traffic flow. Additionally, the driving time is affected by both distance and speed, with
shorter distances and higher speeds resulting in shorter driving times. Therefore, Proposed,
which performed best in terms of both driving distance and speed, showed performance
improvements of about 18–28% in City1 and 7–17% in City2 when compared with those
of the other methods. Moreover, due to fewer detours on the way to the destination,
Proposed was more efficient in terms of distance, thereby leading to shorter travel times.
Compare designed its reward by considering only driving time as a single objective, while
ds + ad designed its reward by considering travel time as a linear function through which
to address multiple objectives. Hence, although both methods aim to minimize travel
time, they showed a difference of about 8–10% due to the different reward designs. On
the other hand, ds + nv considers only travel speed and vehicle density, thus resulting
in many detours to the destination due to the lack of consideration for driving distance.
Consequently, it exhibited the worst performance in terms of travel distance, thereby
leading to a lower travel time performance compared to other methods.
Figure 8 shows the average waiting times for AVs in City1 and City2. A low average
waiting time implies that the traffic flows smoothly and that the AVs drive without waiting. It can be observed that Proposed had a shorter waiting time than the other methods.
Therefore, Proposed indicated a better distribution of traffic flow than the other methods. As
mentioned previously, as the MPR increases, the driving distance and driving time of the
AVs decrease, and the driving speed of the AVs thus increases. In other words, the higher
the ratio of AVs adapted to the dynamic environment, the smoother the traffic flow, and
the lower the waiting time of the AVs. In addition, the reduction in the waiting time for
the AVs indicated that the traffic congestion was low and had a good distribution, thereby

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

11 of 14

implying that the density of AVs was minimized. Therefore, City1, with its higher vehicle
density, exhibited approximately 13–15% longer waiting times than City2.

Figure 7. The average driving time for different MPRs: (a) in City1 and (b) in City2.

Figure 8. The average waiting times in City1 and City2.

Figure 9a,b show the average driving time for AVs to reach their destinations under
different vehicle arrival rates in City1 and City2. Figure 10a,b show the average waiting
time for AVs under different vehicle arrival rates in City1 and City2. The figures indicate
that the average driving and waiting times when the vehicle arrival rates (where the MPR
value was 50%) were 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9. As the vehicle arrival rate increased, the number
of vehicles on the road also increased. This led to higher traffic density on the roads, thus
resulting in increased traffic congestion. Consequently, the driving and waiting times for
the AVs in City1 and City2 increased. Proposed, which minimizes detour routes to the
destination, exhibited the best performance in terms of average driving and waiting times.
This was because Proposed ensures smooth traffic flow regardless of the vehicle arrival rate.
Compare and ds + ad, which have relatively few detours, then followed, and ds + nv was
found to deliver the worst performance due to recommending many detours.

Figure 9. The average driving time for different vehicle arrival rates: (a) in City1 and (b) in City2.

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

12 of 14

Figure 10. The average waiting time for different vehicle arrival rates: (a) in City1 and (b) in City2.

Thus, Proposed yielded the best performance in any environment when the MPR was
low or high, as well as when the vehicles were high or low in density. In addition, the
performance of Proposed was more pronounced in a more dynamic traffic environment.
If the driving distance was simply defined as a reward function without considering the
destination, the shortest distance between actions was selected. This generated detours
to the destination, which increased both driving time and distance. Consequently, the
likelihood of traffic problems, such as traffic congestion, increased. Therefore, Proposed
was modeled as a reward function by considering the distance from the current location
to the destination. Hence, the detour situation was reduced, thereby resulting in a good
performance in terms of the driving distance and increased efficiency. Consequently, the
agent learns to drive at high speeds without detours, thus enabling it to perform better in
terms of driving time. Moreover, the AVs performed well in terms of waiting time because
the traffic flowed smoothly as it traveled along optimal routes. This meant that Proposed
distributes traffic flow well, thus alleviating traffic congestion.
5. Conclusions
This study considered a mixed traffic environment with a combination of AVs and
HVs. We proposed a DRL-based vehicle routing control method with multiple objectives
that incorporate safety and efficiency to distribute traffic flow. Therefore, the objective of
this study was to maximize the long-term reward in terms of driving speed and remaining
driving distance to the destination by controlling the direction at intersections to distribute
traffic flow, as well as to control the routes safely and efficiently to the destination. We
described and formulated a dynamic traffic environment as an MDP system. A DQN was
adopted for the optimal route control method, and each AV—as an agent—learned its policy
independently. We compared the proposed method with conventional methods and other
methods through simulations; the simulation results showed that the proposed method
minimized the driving distance, time, and waiting time of the AVs in any environment and
for all MPRs and traffic densities.
This study has limitations in that each agent learned independently like a single agent,
and that the environment used was simple as it considered only four-way intersections.
In the future, we will utilize driving behavior data with varying road characteristics and
will apply various scenarios [26]. In addition, we will consider that each agent learns in
cooperation with others, rather than learning independently, in a dynamic mixed traffic
system. Furthermore, we plan to extend the vehicle routing control method based on
counterfactual multi-agent policy gradient learning, which determines the contribution of
each agent to the overall reward in cooperation with each other.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.M., H.J. and Y.L.; Methodology, S.M., H.J., S.K. and Y.L.;
Software, S.M.; Writing—Review and Editing, S.M., S.K. and H.J.; and Supervision, H.J. and Y.L. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

13 of 14

Funding: This research was supported by an internal grant (code: 20230403-001) from the Korea
Institute of Civil Engineering and Building Technology (KICT), Republic of Korea. This work
was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT) (No. 2021R1F1A1047113).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data is contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Federal Automated Vehicles Policy: Accelerating the Next Revolution in Roadway
Safety; US Department of Transportation: Washington, DC, USA, 2016.
Rana, M.; Hossain, K. Connected and Autonomous Vehicles and Infrastructures: A Literature Review. Int. J. Pavement Res. Technol.
2021, 16, 264–284. [CrossRef]
Alexander, D.; Gartner, J. Self-Driving Vehicles, Autonomous Parking, and Other Advanced Driver Assistance Systems, Global
Market Analysis and Forecasts, 2013.
Alonso, R.M.; Ciuffo, B.; Makridis, M.; Thiel, C. The Revolution of Driving: From Connected Vehicles to Coordinated Automated Road
Transport (C-ART); Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2017; pp. 93–94.
Park, S.; Ritchie, S.G. Exploring the Relationship Between Freeway Speed Variance, Lane Changing, and Vehicle Heterogeneity.
In Proceedings of the 83rd Annual Meeting of Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, USA, 11–15 January 2004.
Erdelić, T.; Carić, T. A Survey on the Electric Vehicle Routing Problem: Variants and Solution Approaches. J. Adv. Transp. 2019,
2019, 1–49. [CrossRef]
Mor, A.; Speranza, M.G. Vehicle Routing Problems over Time: A Survey. Ann. Oper. Res. 2022, 314, 255–275. [CrossRef]
Chen, D.; Jiang, L.; Wang, Y.; Li, Z. Autonomous Driving using Safe Reinforcement Learning by Incorporating a Regret-based
Human Lane-Changing Decision Model. In Proceedings of the 2020 American Control Conference (ACC), Denver, CO, USA,
1–3 July 2020.
Mnih, V.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A.A.; Veness, J.; Bellemare, M.G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fidjeland, A.K.;
Ostrovski, G.; et al. Human-Level Control through Deep Reinforcement Learning. Nature 2015, 518, 529–533. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Guo, Y.N.; Cheng, J.; Luo, S.; Gong, D.; Xue, Y. Robust Dynamic Multi-Objective Vehicle Routing Optimization Method. TCBB
2018, 15, 1891–1903. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ruiz, E.; Soto-Mendoza, V.; Barbosa, A.E.R.; Reyes, R. Solving the Open Vehicle Routing Problem with Capacity and Distance
Constraints with A Biased Random Key Genetic Algorithm. CAIE 2019, 133, 207–219. [CrossRef]
Hyunjin, J.; Yujin, L. Ant Colony Optimized Routing Strategy for Electric Vehicles. J. Adv. Transp. 2018, 2018, 5741982.
Shi, T.; Wang, P.; Cheng, X.; Chan, C.Y.; Huang, D. Driving Decision and Control for Automated Lane Change Behavior based on
Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), Auckland,
New Zealand, 27–30 October 2019.
Ye, F.; Cheng, X.; Wang, P.; Chan, C.Y.; Zhang, J. Automated Lane Change Strategy using Proximal Policy Optimization-based Deep
Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 19 October–13
November 2020.
Dong, J.; Chen, S.; Li, Y.; Du, R.; Steinfeld, A.; Labi, S. Space-weighted Information Fusion Using Deep Reinforcement Learning:
The Context of Tactical Control of Lane-changing Autonomous Vehicles and Connectivity Range Assessment. Transp. Res. Part C
Emerg. 2021, 128, 103192. [CrossRef]
Gu, Y.; Yuan, K.; Yang, S.; Ning, M.; Huang, Y. Mandatory Lane-Changing Decision-Making in Dense Traffic for Autonomous
Vehicles based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 6th CAA International Conference on Vehicular
Control and Intelligence (CVCI), Nanjing, China, 28–30 October 2022.
Zhao, W.; Guo, H.; Zhao, X.; Dai, Q. Intelligent Vehicle Path Planning Based on Q-Learning Algorithm with Consideration of
Smoothness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), Shanghai, China, 6–8 November 2020.
Koh, S.S.; Zhou, B.; Yang, P.; Yang, Z.; Fang, H.; Feng, J. Reinforcement Learning for Vehicle Route Optimization in SUMO. In
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications, Exeter, UK,
28–30 June 2018.
Songsang, K.; Bo, Z.; Hui, F.; Po, Y.; Zaili, Y.; Qiang, Y.; Lin, G.; Zhigang, J. Real-Time Deep Reinforcement Learning based Vehicle
Navigation. Appl. Soft Comput. 2020, 96, 106694.
Kim, C.; Yoon, Y.; Kim, S.; Yoo, M.J.; Yi, K. Trajectory Planning and Control of Autonomous Vehicles for Static Vehicle Avoidance
in Dynamic Traffic Environments. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 5772–5788. [CrossRef]
Yang, L.; Lu, C.; Xiong, G.; Xing, Y.; Gong, J. A Hybrid Motion Planning Framework for Autonomous Driving in Mixed Traffic
Flow. Green Energy Technol. 2022, 1, 100022. [CrossRef]

Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2214

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.

14 of 14

Huang, M.; Jiang, Z.P.; Ozbay, K. Learning-Based Adaptive Optimal Control for Connected Vehicles in Mixed Traffic: Robustness
to Driver Reaction Time. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2022, 52, 5267–5277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Lopez, P.A.; Behrisch, M.; Walz, L.B.; Erdmann, J.; Flötteröd, Y.P.; Hilbrich, R.; Lücken, L.; Rummel, J.; Wagner, P.; Wiessner, E.
Microscopic Traffic Simulation using SUMO. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), Maui, HI, USA, 4–7 November 2018.
Treiber, M.; Hennecke, A.; Helbing, D. Congested Traffic States in Empirical Observations and Microscopic Simulations. Phys.
Rev. E 2000, 62, 1805–1824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Di, X.; Shi, R. A Survey on Autonomous Vehicle Control in the Era of Mixed-Autonomy: From Physics-Based to AI-Guided
Driving Policy Learning. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. 2021, 125, 103008. [CrossRef]
Sungwon, M.; Seolwon, K.; Yujin, L. Real-Time Trajectory Control for Vehicle based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. In
Proceedings of the IEEE 42nd International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 5–8 January 2024.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

