37590

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

Proactive Urban Expressway Guidance: A Hybrid
Approach Using Reinforcement Learning and
Traffic Prediction Models
Linghao Wang , Zheyuan Jiang , Ziyue Qi, Ziyi Shi, Xiqun Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zheng Zhu

Abstract—Addressing traffic congestion is significant in
enhancing urban mobility. Traditional navigation systems use
real-time traffic status to push the temporally shortest path to
drivers, forming selfish-routing, which guide traffic flow to the
same roadway, thereby causing imbalance traffic flow distribution
and navigation-induced congestion. Besides, navigation based on
real-time detected traffic metrics may cause the congestion oscillation during periods with high travel demand variations. This
article proposes the traffic prediction and reinforcement learningbased navigation guidance (TP-RLNG) approach for active
control of traffic flow on urban expressways. The TP-RLNG
introduces a differentiated guidance approach with multiple
origin-destination (OD) pairs, replacing the conventional all-ornothing route guidance strategies. To enhance the stability, the
TP-RLNG integrates traffic prediction and reinforcement learning (RL)-based dynamic optimization to prospectively harmonize
traffic supply and demand overall the expressway system. In
contrast to the RL navigation guidance (RLNG) (no prediction)
approach, the integration of traffic prediction model in TP-RLNG
enhances the anticipation of critical nodes and enables proactive
traffic management. We use SUMO-based traffic simulation to
examine the efficacy of TP-RLNG and alternative approaches in
controlling traffic flow within the Hangzhou Liushi Expressway
network under varying demand patterns. The results underscore
the ability of TP-RLNG to enhance road network efficiency
and mitigate urban expressway congestion. The findings indicate
that, relative to RLNG approaches, our methodology achieves a
reduction in average travel time of 9.3%.
Index Terms—Intelligent transportation systems, microscopic
traffic modeling, reinforcement learning (RL), traffic management, traffic prediction.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

RAFFIC congestion, a multifaceted issue, detrimentally
impacts the environment, economy, and society [1].

Received 15 December 2024; revised 12 March 2025, 30 March 2025, and
31 May 2025; accepted 23 June 2025. Date of publication 27 June 2025;
date of current version 8 September 2025. This work was supported in
part by the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang pvovince, China, under
Grant LZ25E080007; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 72401255 and Grant 72350710798; and in part by the Smart
Urban Future (SURF) Laboratory, Zhejiang Province. (Corresponding author:
Zheng Zhu.)
Linghao Wang, Ziyi Shi, Xiqun Chen, and Zheng Zhu are with the
College of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China (e-mail: linghaowang@zju.edu.cn; 22212300@zju.edu.cn;
chenxiqun@zju.edu.cn; zhuzheng89@zju.edu.cn;).
Zheyuan Jiang and Ziyue Qi are with the Polytechnic Institute, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China (e-mail: jiangzheyuan@zju.edu.cn;
22260190@zju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3583833

The genesis of traffic congestion is complex, transcending
simplistic explanations of excessive demand or inadequate
supply. En-route travel decisions made by drivers can be a
core factor for causing congestions. That is, once numerous
drivers access the network simultaneously, and each opts for
their personally optimal route, the collective outcome can be
suboptimal, exacerbating congestion [2].
To mitigate congestion, various traffic management strategies have been developed, such as variable message signs
(VMSs). VMSs adapt their content to the evolving conditions on the road, thereby aiding drivers in making more
informed decisions. Empirical studies have validated the efficacy of VMSs in alleviating congestion [3]. However, several
limitations of VMSs have been identified. VMSs typically
dispense uniform information to all drivers; this one-sizefits-all approach often reduces the overall network efficiency.
The evolution of navigation apps (such as Google Maps and
Amap), which become indispensable tools for drivers, marks
a significant departure from VMSs. Chief among these is
the provision of routes with real-time shortest travel time
or distance to users [4]. This leads to selfish-routing, where
drivers departing from the same origin-destination (OD) pair
during the same time period are offered the identical shortest
path [2]. Selfish-routing has been criticized for its inherent
limitations, such as its inability to divert traffic flow, resulting
in navigation-induced bottlenecks and congestion. This can
result in “congestion oscillations,” which means congestion
shifts between alternative routes as each becomes periodically
overloaded [5].
To mitigate these issues, a myriad of route guidance
approaches have been developed. This approach has seen various innovative applications, including a reinforcement learning
(RL)-based navigation system [6], and a distributed ant colony
optimization algorithm for pathfinding [7]. Nevertheless, the
principal constraint of it lies in its inability to guide varied
routes for vehicles within a singular time slot. This approach
has implemented an all-or-nothing approach to guidance traffic. To achieve a more balanced traffic flow distribution, it
is critical to provide differentiated paths for users from the
same OD pair within the same time period. In addition, current
route guidance computes route diversion strategies based
on detected/user uploaded real-time and temporally traffic
conditions. However, these methods often have the drawback
of potentially causing new congestion in other areas due to its
myopic view of traffic conditions. Therefore, it is essential to

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
2327-4662 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

anticipate near-future traffic conditions for differentiated route
guidance. This approach can help avoid potential congestion
and achieve an optimal global traffic state.
To overcome the limitations of current route guidance
systems, this article introduces a traffic prediction and reinforcement learning-based navigation guidance (TP-RLNG)
approach. To solve the problem that previous navigation systems can only perform all-or-nothing guidance, the
proposed approach attempts to achieve proactive congestion
management by providing drivers departing from the same
OD pair with differentiated routes. The previous navigation
system’s reliance on real-time traffic data leads to instability
in its guidance strategies. We integrate traffic prediction
and RL-based dynamic optimization. The TP-RLNG consists
of four components: 1) an expressway system (incorporating user-side navigation and road-side detection); 2) a
traffic prediction module; 3) a route diversion decisionmaking module; and 4) a Markov decision process (MDP).
To adeptly navigate the complexities inherent in dynamic
optimization with multiple agents (each agent controls the
traffic flow of one OD pair), the value-decomposition actor–
critics (VDAC) Deep RL (DRL) algorithm is utilized to
solve the MDP model. The performance of TP-RLNG is
evaluated using the SUMO microscopic simulation, focusing
on Hangzhou’s Liushi Expressway system under various travel
demand scenarios. Comparative analysis under various traffic
flow conditions reveals that TP-RLNG outperforms original
RL navigation guidance (RLNG) (without traffic prediction)
approach, particularly in scenarios characterized by high traffic
flow concentration. Although this approach may sacrifice the
interests of some users, it has a great promoting effect on
the overall interests, ensuring that the optimal route for the
majority is prioritized for enhanced systemic efficiency.
The key contributions of this article are as follows.
1) This study introduces a differentiated route guidance method tailored for multiple OD pairs. This
approach supersedes the conventional all-or-nothing
guidance strategy, effectively redistributing traffic flow
and enhancing the overall efficiency of the road network.
2) To bolster the stability of the guidance system,
the proposed TP-RLNG approach integrates traffic
prediction with RL. This integration enhances the
system’s anticipation of congestion-prone key nodes.
3) Through numerical analyses, we elucidate the superiority of TP-RLNG over conventional route guidance
methods in relevant scenarios and performance metrics.
While RLNG approach offers post hoc mitigation of traffic congestion, TP-RLNG proactively forecasts potential
traffic bottlenecks and avoid navigation-induced congestion.
The structure of this article is organized as follows.
Section II reviews pertinent literature related to route guidance,
traffic prediction, and the application of RL in transportation.
Section III elaborates on the TP-RLNG approach’s framework,
including the integration between traffic prediction and route
navigation, the construction of the MDP model, and the RLbased algorithm. Section IV details the experimental setup
and performance analysis. Finally, Section V consolidates the

37591

primary findings and outlines potential avenues for future
research.
II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
The literature review encompasses a comprehensive survey
across several pivotal domains: studies in route guidance,
traffic prediction methods, and the applications of RL within
the realm of dynamic transportation/traffic control problems.
This review culminates in a synthesized conclusion, integrating
insights drawn from these diverse areas to forge a cohesive
understanding of the current research.
A. Route Guidance Studies
Route guidance strategies generally fall into three categories: 1) iterative strategies; 2) feedback strategies; and
3) predictive strategies. These strategies are predominantly
implemented through VMSs.
Iterative strategies optimize routing decisions by running the
traffic network model repeatedly and accounting for various
factors over a future time horizon [8]. Feedback strategies
guide traffic flow by responding to observed network conditions [9]. These strategies are grounded in the feedback
concept and adapt to real-time traffic conditions, with the
objective of guiding the system toward a predefined state
characterized by metrics, such as flows, densities, or travel
times [10]. Predictive strategies leverage the strengths of both
aforementioned strategy types while mitigating their respective
drawbacks [11]. This novel strategy involves running a mathematical model once during each time step and making routing
decisions based on anticipated traffic conditions. Liang and
Wakahara [12] introduced an urban traffic prediction model
into a route guidance system, and experimental results indicate
that proactive route guidance yields superior performance
compared to feedback-based strategy. Due to the advancements
in satellite navigation systems, the implementation of guidance
strategies can now be facilitated through navigation apps.
Angelelli et al. [13] propose a proactive route guidance
approach based on the Global Positioning System (GPS),
which allocates paths to users to minimize congestion while
avoiding significant increases in their travel inconvenience.
Route guidance strategies relying on VMS are constrained
by device limitations, allowing only the broadcasting of
identical guidance information for users of a single roadway.
Currently, navigation software typically recommends routes
that simply bypass uncongested roadways, without concerning
the potential bottlenecks induced by such all-or-nothing guidance and the negative impacts on the overall traffic network.
To address this, we need to shift our focus toward optimizing
the global transportation network as a whole.
B. Traffic Prediction and Applications
Traffic prediction can be categorized into two main
approaches: 1) data-driven and 2) model-driven. Data-driven
models predict future traffic conditions by learning from
historical time series traffic data. Statistical learning models,
such as Kalman filter model [14], and Bayesian network
(BN) model [15] have been used to predict the near future

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37592

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

traffic flow. With the explosive growth of available data,
artificial intelligence (AI) models have gained prominence due
to their exceptional data processing and learning capabilities. These models include long short-term memory network
(LSTM) [16], evolutionary computation approaches[17], graph
network (GN) [18] and Gaussian Process [19], [20]. Chen
proposed an urban road network traffic flow prediction framework based on deep learning (DL), which combines feature
engineering and spectral clustering methods to extract and
compress data features. Subsequently, they constructed a
hybrid prediction model that integrates LSTM networks and
sparse autoencoders [21].
Model-driven prediction relies on physical traffic flow laws
and computer technologies to establish mathematical models.
To capture the fundamental characteristics of traffic flow,
scholars have introduced numerous traffic flow models, such
as cellular automata model [22] and car-following model [23].
These models are incorporated into traffic simulation software,
which employs simulation to predict future traffic congestion.
Simulation tools like VISSIM [24] and SUMO [25] are widely
employed in real-time traffic state prediction.
As traffic prediction methods advance, scholars are increasingly applying traffic prediction models to route guidance
scheme, thus forming proactive traffic management strategies.
Zhang [26] utilized an LSTM neural network to predict
urban traffic data and integrated a double-tracking Dijkstra
algorithm to propose a prediction-based path guidance scheme.
Neiman [27] developed an algorithm that predicts vehicle
arrival times using SUMO simulation platform and dynamically guides a portion of vehicles along less congested
routes, thereby reducing traffic delays. Within the literature on
traffic management, only a minority of papers utilize traffic
prediction models, indicating an underutilization of these models in traffic management. Incorporating traffic flow prediction
into traffic control systems can enhance their effectiveness to
a certain degree.

optimized for an individual OD pair do not necessarily
translate to optimal network-wide solutions.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, various
multiagent RL (MARL) algorithms have been proposed. Pan
and Liu [34] outlined a new MARL design addressing dynamic
uncertainties in vehicle routes. Qi et al. [35] integrated a RL
formulation in a navigation system to balance vehicle travel
time and environmental benefits.
Most existing RL approaches for en-route traffic guidance
focus on the diversion of individual vehicles [36], [37], [38].
These methods typically guide vehicles through a series of
local paths, defining the action space as the next path selection.
Consequently, the state variables in the MDP are also dynamic
until the destination is reached. This characteristic limits
their utility in real-world navigation systems. In addition, the
integration of traffic prediction and RL in traffic guidance
is an emerging area of research that is garnering increased
interest [33], [39]. Our proposed approach offers several
advancements over previous methodologies. First, while earlier
methods primarily targeted optimization at the OD level, our
approach enhances the efficiency of the entire road network
through a multi-OD joint optimization strategy. Second, prior
researches typically address traffic management post-incident,
aiming to mitigate congestion resulting from unforeseen accidents. In contrast, our approach leverages predictive analytics
to identify potential congestion preemptively and proactively
manages traffic flow to alleviate congestion before it occurs,
thereby enhancing overall network efficiency.

C. Applications of RL in Transportation
RL is a paradigm of learning the optimal control/management strategies through interaction between one
or multiple agents and an environment. Recently, RL has
achieved remarkable advancements in various domains. It
has been effectively applied in areas, such as traffic signal
control [28], ebike/bike rebalancing [29], online ride hailing
subsidy [30], transportation route choice [31] among others. Additionally, RL has been instrumental in addressing
challenges in route guidance systems. In the initial stages
of RL-based route guidance studies, several single-agent
approaches were explored, in which the RL focuses predominantly on controlling the traffic of a singular OD pair within
a road network. Mao and Shen [32] proposed a Q-learning
method for a single agent, enhancing the decision-making
process by incorporating global state information. Lee [33]
implemented transfer learning within DRL frameworks to
enhance the robustness and interoperability of route guidance
algorithms. However, such an approach exhibits limitations
when extended to the broader road network, as strategies

D. Summary from Literature
The theoretical studies on route guidance systems have been
expended to a OD level guidance with real-time traffic conditions. However, the current systems could not anticipate future
congestions (induced by high demand or navigation) or propose underlying strategies to mitigate/avoid such congestions
in advance. Given modern traffic flow sensing and prediction
technologies, the integration of RL-based differential route
guidance and network-level traffic prediction would become a
promising approach for achieving proactive congestion control
of transportation systems.
To fulfill the research gap, this article proposes a novel
TP-RLNG approach, which contains the following distinguished features. First, instead of “all-or-nothing” guidance,
the proposed approach utilizes the diversion ratio of routes
as the route guidance action/decision. This set allows for the
realization of diversion effects of traffic flow of the same OD
pairs within identical time periods. Second, the TP-RLNG
offers the diversion ratios for each predefined OD pair within
the path set, as opposed to generating a sequence of en
route, locally optimized routing paths. The model’s state space
encompasses variables representing the entire road network,
while disregarding dynamic state variations. Consequently,
this approach can be efficiently integrated into real-world
traffic guidance systems. In the end, conventional routing
methods like Dijkstra’s or A* algorithm use real-time traffic
data from technologies, such as induction loop detectors to
compute optimal routes. However, these methods lack the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

Fig. 1.

Four constituent modules and interaction process.

ability to predict future traffic changes, leading to potentially
suboptimal rerouting decisions. Integrating prediction with RL
aims to address this by focusing on future traffic states for
proactive traffic management, using traffic flow predictions
to anticipate patterns and enable more effective preemptive
guidance strategies.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The TP-RLNG approach is conceived for application on
actual expressway systems, including expressways and their
parallel roads. This approach includes four components: 1) an
expressway system (incorporating user-side navigation and
road-side detection); 2) a traffic prediction module; 3) a
route diversion decision-making module; and 4) a MDP that
integrates the former three modules. Within this framework,
TP-RLNG assumes a pivotal role in managing a set of primary
OD pairs on expressways system, aiming to optimize the travel
efficiency of vehicles over an operational horizon (e.g., the
morning/afternoon peak period).
Before the real-world implementation, this article engages
in theoretical exploration, as the expressway system equipped
with road detectors and user-side navigation apps is substituted by a microscopic traffic simulation model. Moreover,
employing RL in practical scenarios proves to be uneasy
due to the scarcity of observed transitions and computational
inefficiency. Consequently, the system is simulated repetitively
in theoretical research to ascertain the upper boundary of route
guidance performance. Section III-A describes the proposed
framework in details and Section III-B provides the modeling
and learning flowchart.
A. TP-RLNG Framework
The TP-RLNG integrates four interdependent modules,
i.e., the expressway system (simulation) module, the traffic
prediction module, an MDP, and a route diversion decision
module (controlled by DRL) (see Fig. 1).
The expressway system delineated in this study is characterized by a singular expressway, its multiple parallel roads,
and drivers from a set of primary OD pairs and background
(other) OD pairs. The system is equipped to detect and
record real-time positioning and trajectories of vehicles (via

37593

mobile navigation apps) and the traffic status of roadways (via
road detectors), subsequently relaying on this information to
the prediction/decision module. For theoretical and numerical
analysis, the system is developed on the SUMO platform,
which also serves as the traffic prediction module. When
using SUMO in the system module, it serves a dual purpose: first, to provide the prediction module with the current
traffic conditions (demand and route choice proportions);
second, to evaluate the performance of route guidance strategies/decisions. It operates by implementing route guidance
strategies received from the MDP and evaluates their effectiveness. Subsequently, the system module calculates and delivers
the reward back to the MDP. For the traffic prediction module,
a twin SUMO model of the system is adopted to acquire realtime OD demand and current traffic status from the system
module, based on which it forecasts future traffic conditions.
These predictions are then fed into the MDP model for state
processing. The route diversion decision module primarily
acquires transmission experience from MDP and coordinates
the dispatch of trained route guidance decisions back to MDP.
The optimal route guidance strategy is trained utilizing the
VDAC algorithm.
An MDP is a standardized dynamic programming framework, in which one or multiple agents try to optimize
the decision-making policies to maximize the total reward
in a dynamic system. In many engineering problems, an
MDP is generally solved by the DRL, which has specific
design for learning polices via the interactions between the
system and the agents’ actions (decisions). The proposed
MDP segments the entire control duration into multiple discrete time steps and formulates the route guidance control
as a dynamic optimization problem. That is, following the
predicted/observed traffic condition, the agents (one agent
controls the route diverting ratio of vehicles from one primary
OD pair) rely on the decision module (the specifically designed
DRL) to seek the optimal route division strategies of primary
OD pairs that leads to the best system-wide traffic efficiency
across the horizon. Moreover, the MDP is responsible of
summarizing the system states (both observed and predicted)
from simulation and prediction, generating actions based on
states and policies and feeding to the system, receiving rewards
from the system, and transfer states, actions, rewards to the
DRL-based decision module for policy updating. This iterative
process is continuously employed to refine and optimize the
system.
In the proposed framework, real-time traffic data acquisition
is pivotal for the effective implementation of the system. The
technologies integral to this process include loop detectors,
microwave sensors, video surveillance systems, floating car
data (FCD), and GPS-equipped data acquisition devices. For
the input of the state space in an MDP, it can be obtained
either through partial road detection data combined with a
DL prediction model, or through partial user navigation OD
data coupled with microscopic traffic simulation predictions.
Considering the physical implementations in the real world,
the former requires existing road detection devices, while the
latter necessitates devices, such as cell phones, in-vehicle navigation systems, or Cooperative Intelligent Transport System

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37594

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

(C-ITS) devices. For the operationalization of the optimal
routing strategy, a centralized decision-maker plays a crucial
role, diverging from traditional navigation systems. This entity
is responsible for both the training and decision-making
processes, leveraging both online and offline data integration.
In the offline phase, substantial traffic datasets and simulations
are amassed to facilitate the training of RL algorithms, culminating in the creation of a comprehensive policy table that
maps various states to their corresponding traffic management
strategies. In online deployment, future traffic conditions,
based on traffic detection and DL or real-time user navigation
OD data with simulation prediction, are utilized to query the
policy table. This enables the retrieval and dissemination of
the current optimal strategy. This information is subsequently
relayed to end-users through navigation systems or C-ITS
devices. The adaptability of this approach is ensured by
periodic updates—potentially on a weekly basis or at different
intervals—which allow for the continual refinement of the RL
policy based on evolving traffic patterns and conditions.
1) Expressway System Module: We develop an expressway
system simulation that leverages mobile navigation app and
real-time road network monitoring. Essential to this system is
the selection of appropriate traffic simulation software, which
must exhibit certain key characteristics. First, it is imperative
to facilitate real-time monitoring of the road network status.
Second, the system must cater to the travel demand of individual users, necessitating a understanding of microscopic user
behavior and preferences. Third, the traffic simulation software
must be capable of conducting real-time interactions with
MDP and DRL algorithms. Considering these requirements,
this study utilize SUMO, which is an open-source, robust,
versatile, and highly scalable microscopic traffic simulation
software [40]. SUMO has a Traffic Control Interface (TraCI)
module to facilitate adaptive interaction between the simulation environment and advanced traffic control approaches [41].
This interface allows for the retrieval and manipulation of
simulation object attributes, enabling dynamic interaction
through the Python programming language. While SUMO
offers significant cost and accessibility advantages but exhibits
limitations in detailed micro-simulations and complex urban
environment handling compared to proprietary software like
Vissim and Aimsun. Notably, while capable of managing large
traffic networks, SUMO’s performance tends to degrade with
increased network size and complexity, potentially affecting
the frame rates during simulations [42].
The primary inputs for this module include road data (road
network files), demand information (routing files), and traffic
guidance strategies. This study utilizes high-resolution satellite
imagery from OpenStreetMap to extract road network data,
focusing on nodes (intersections) and roadways (distinguished
by one-way or two-way traffic). This study constructs and
simulates the traffic dynamics during specific time periods of
the day using data to refine the simulation. Route guidance
strategies are received from the MDP, which control route
diversions of primary OD pairs via the SUMO TraCI interface.
In other words, TraCI would modify the routes of corresponding drivers in the routing file to mimic the functionality of
real-world navigation systems. In each simulation time step,

the model updates key parameters, such as vehicle position
and operational status, and also responds to traffic guidance
interventions. This allows for the dynamic representation of
road network conditions throughout the simulation period.
The module primarily generates two key outputs. The first
is a comprehensive simulation result file containing detailed
temporal traffic metrics on all the roadways in the system.
The second output involves feeding the current system traffic
metrics (i.e., travel demand, network flow, and route choice
proportion generated by route guidance strategies) into the
traffic prediction module, which predicts near-future system
condition as the state of the MDP. The information presented
in the second output exhibits a higher level of detail regarding
traffic data, specifically including the precise locations of
individual vehicles.
In summary, at any time step, the simulation receives
route guidance actions from the MDP, simulate the current
network-wide traffic condition within this time step. Then it
generates the reward metrics for this time step (to MDP)
and the supply and demand information for next time step
prediction (to the prediction module). The latter ensures that
the traffic prediction module has access to real-time traffic
conditions, thereby significantly improving the route guidance
performance.
2) Traffic Prediction Module: The traffic prediction module
utilized herein accepts two primary inputs: the detailed travel
demands of the users (real-time location, destination, and
trajectory) and the current (real-time) or historical traffic
conditions encompassing the road network. As mentioned
previously, the former information is accessible through navigation apps and the latter comes from road-side detectors.
Based on the input data stream, our traffic prediction could
follow a dual-driven paradigm, wherein DL models (current and near future traffic conditions as input and output,
respectively) and simulation model (traffic condition and user
demand are input for simulating traffic dynamics) are fused to
provide reliable outcomes. The output generated by the traffic
prediction module is a detailed account of key traffic metrics of
the next time step (or next several time steps) on expressways
and their parallel sections. The predictions are then integrated
into the MDP as part of the agent state, facilitating a more
nuanced understanding and management of traffic dynamics.
In this article, the SUMO is employed to forecast imminent
traffic congestion. That is, a twin SUMO model is created
to make near-future traffic predictions. Employing microsimulation principles, the SUMO-based prediction module aims
to meticulously record the prevailing conditions of the road
network, ensuring continuous updates to near future travel
distribution patterns. As mentioned in Section III-A1 real-time
data acquisition is facilitated through the expressway system
simulation module. The prediction length in this article can
be set as 5, 10, or 15 min (a 4-min prediction is adopted in
this article), during which period the route choices/diversions
would remain constant with the current condition and the traffic is predicted via microsimulation principles. The outcome
of this simulation is the acquisition of real-time traffic data.
3) Markov Decision Processes Module: In the context of
the expressway system, the optimization of the differentiated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

Fig. 2.

MDP module.

route guidance plans primarily hinges upon the effective
control of the primary OD pairs over a horizon of T time
steps. Before seeking the optimal route guidance plans under
various travel demand patterns, it is necessary to develop an
MDP module that encodes/decodes the system traffic conditions and route guidance plans between the decision module,
the simulation module, and prediction module. The MDP
amalgamates the system transformations of states, actions, and
rewards, synthesizes information among the decision module,
simulation module, and prediction module. This time-step
based feedback loop facilitates the continued learning and
adaptation of the route guidance decisions, enhancing its
effectiveness and robustness in active congestion mitigation.
Fig. 2 shows the specific definition of MDP. The definitions
of agent, state, action, reward are as follows.
Agent: An agent in the MDP is conceptualized as the route
division controller for a singular primary OD pair. The total
count of agents corresponds to the number of primary OD
pairs. Notably, these agents adhere to fixed initial policies,
while the routes they traverse dynamically evolve based on
the decision module (i.e., DRL). In other words, each agent
selects actions contingent upon the state and the policy derived
from the DRL algorithm. Agents begins with a heightened rate
of exploration (throughout the solution space), enabling the
DRL algorithm to assess the impact of varying guidance rates;
this exploratory phase is governed by a decay rate, designed
to gradually stabilize the strategy as training progresses. To
optimize the overall traffic conditions on the network, a fully
cooperative framework is employed, wherein each agent aims
to strategically manage traffic across their respective OD pairs,
fostering a collaborative environment that enhances overall
system performance.
State: Aiming at proactive traffic control, agents in the
proposed TP-RLNG regards predicted traffic condition (given
by the prediction module) as their states. Specifically, we set
the traffic flow prediction periods (intervals) as t, and the
road network is represented by M edges. For the predicted
road network at time step t + t, we consider three critical
parameters for each road segment m: the vehicle count bt+t,m ,
the average speed of vehicles vt+t,m and the mean length
lt+t,m . Consequently, the state at time period t is defined as

st = bt+t,1 , . . . , bt+t,M

(1)
vt+t,1 , . . . ,t+t,M , lt+t,1 , . . . , lt+t,M .

37595

Action: In order to achieve the diversion of primary OD
pairs, the action of an agent is defined as the route division/distribution of vehicles among the feasible paths of the
corresponding primary OD, in which the path set is predetermined. Specifically, the action is defined as an N-dimensional
vector, where N corresponds to the total number of paths from
the controllable primary OD pair. The proportion of traffic
allocated to each path, denoted as pt,n for a given path n at
time t, is a continuous variable. Specifically, the output action
is the initial diversion strategy of the controlled vehicle, which,
once determined, must adhere to the chosen route without any
en-route diversion


(2)
at = pt,1 , pt,2 , . . . , pt,n .
Reward: In the context of fully cooperation, the cumulative
reward for each agent is denoted as Ri , and is uniform across
all agents, expressed as
R1 = R2 = · · · = R =

T


rt

(3)

t=1

where rt denotes the reward garnered by an agent at time step
t, and it is a function of action at and state st
rt (at , st ) = −

M


TTt,m

(4)

m=1

where TTt,m represents the total travel time for road segment.
The aggregation of TTt,m for all segments yields the total
travel time for the entire road network. Due to the potential
convergence issues arising from delayed rewards, we employ
the API in SUMO to approximate vehicular travel times. This
estimation, while not reflecting the precise travel durations,
serves as an indicator of the overall congestion levels within
the road network.
4) Route Diversion Decision Module: In this study, we
employ a MARL approach, i.e., the VDAC algorithm, to seek
the optimal dynamic route guidance strategies of the MDP
module. This implementation marks the inaugural application
of VDAC algorithms within the realm of transportation,
offering a novel perspective in this field.
The VDAC algorithm, introduced by Su et al. [43], represents an evolution of the multiagent Actor–Critic (A2C)
framework. The primary objective of VDAC is to strike a balance between operational efficiency and performance efficacy.
Empirical evidence presented by Su et al. [43] substantiates
the superiority of the VDAC algorithm over other actor–critic
methodologies.
Central to VDAC’s methodology is the reliance on agentlocal observations, denoted as V i , which represent the local
state value for agent i. The algorithm utilizes Vtot , to signify the
global state value based on the actual state of the environment.
A distinctive feature of VDAC is the incorporation of local
critics. These local critics are capable of sharing a network
with other actors while estimating local state values V i .
Concurrently, the central critic is tasked with learning the
global state value Vtot .
In scenarios where ec is defined as the episode count, the
initial hidden state of agent i, denoted by hio , serves a purpose

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37596

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 VDAC Algorithm
Input: Initialize hypernetwork θ c and actor network θ
for each training episode e do
Empty Buffer
for ec =1 to BatchSize
n
t= 0, hoi for each agent i
while t = 1, 2...T do
t =t+1
for each agent a do
hit , πti , Vti =actor(sit , hit−1 , uit−1 .i; θ )
Sample action uit from πti
Sample action uit from πti
end for
Get reward rt and next state st+1
end while
add experience to buffer
end for
Collate episodes in buffer into single batch
for t = 1 to T do
Batch unroll RNN using states, actions and reward
Calculate yt and at using θ
Accumulate gradient wrt:θv ← θv + ∇θ (yt −
Vtot (V1 , V2 , ..., Vn ))2
end for
for t = 1 to T do
t+1
t
− Vtot
At = rt+1 + λVtot
Accumulate gradient wrt θ :θπ ← θπ +
∇θ logπθ (uat | sat )At
end for
Update actor weights θ = θ + απ θπ − αv θv
end for

of critical importance. This hidden state, notably, undergoes
an update at a particular time step t, functioning essentially
as a mnemonic device that stores the preceding experiences
and states of the agent. The policy function, in this context, is
represented by πθ . Furthermore, the expected return, typified
by yt , is defined as the cumulative reward that starts from the
time step t and extends until the task concludes or reaches
a certain truncation point. The function of yt is primarily to
work in coordination with At to facilitate adjustments to the
parameters of the agent’s policy. The systematic application of
such processes, when well-executed, can help to optimize the
overall performance of the agent, providing it with a robust
capability to respond effectively based on its accumulated
experiences and rewards.
B. Modeling and Learning Flowchart of TP-RLNG
The TP-RLNG aims to provide a novel approach to control
expressway systems. Each of its modules plays a distinctive yet
cohesive role to form a synergistic network that can emulate,
project, and strategize based upon prevailing traffic realities.
The system module emulates present traffic scenarios, aiding
decision-making regarding immediate navigational course of
actions. The prediction module, on the other hand, anticipates
forthcoming traffic scenarios to allow proactive strategizing.

Fig. 3.

Detailed modeling and learning flowchart.

Finally, the DRL decision module designs guidance strategies
based on the feedback from the simulation and prediction
modules. The information, states, rewards, actions of the aforementioned three modules are transferred and communicated
via the MDP. Given the system module, prediction module,
and MDP, the decision module is tasked with undergoing
training over a predefined number of epochs. Fig. 3 illustrates
the detailed modeling and learning flowchart within each
epoch, which employs a color-coded to differentiate between
various operational phases and their interactions over time.
The blue line signifies both the initiation and termination of
the approach. The orange line denotes the cyclic transmission
of information within each time step t, encapsulating the
temporal evolution of the process. The red line is indicative of
the information exchange within the route diversion decision
module.
Within each epoch, the approach engages in system simulation and route guidance activities across T time steps.
Preliminary setup involves the system module initialization
(warming up demand and traffic state), and the route diversion
decision module establishes a random initial policy. After
initialization, time t incrementally progresses from 0 to T.
The sequence of operations for each time slot unfolds as
follows: The MDP module uses a forecasted traffic status
from the traffic prediction module. Subsequently, it retrieves
the current policy from the decision module. An action is
derived according to the policy and state, and is passed from
the MDP to the system module. Following this, the system
module assimilates the current traffic demand pertinent to
the ongoing time, and modulates the traffic diversion ratio
as influenced by vehicle movements, in accordance with the
actions relayed. The simulated results within time step t from
the system module is summarized as the reward and transferred
to MDP. Meanwhile, a twin SUMO simulation leveraging
the current traffic conditions and the latest division action
as reported by the traffic simulation module is conducted,
and its near future results until t + t are regarded as the
anticipated states, which is forwarded to MDP. This iterative
adjustment ensures the continual alignment of the traffic
prediction module with the real-time dynamics observed in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

Fig. 4.

OD pairs and their alternate routes.
TABLE I
OD PAIRS AND T HEIR A LTERNATIVE ROUTES

the traffic simulation environment, thereby refining the overall
predictive accuracy of the system. After the execution of T
time steps, the cumulative rewards are computed, representing
the performance of the differentiated route guidance decision.
IV. C ASE S TUDY
To assess the efficacy of the TP-RLNG approach, a
SUMO-based system simulation model that reflects real-world
conditions is established. The simulation replicates the Liushi
Expressway in Hangzhou, China, accompanied by parallel
arterial roads. Section IV-A encompasses the development
and calibration of the system module and the prediction
module, the determination of MDP hyperparameters, and the
hyperparameters of DRL algorithm. Section IV-B presents a
detailed analysis of the experimental results, offering insights
into the practical implications and effectiveness of the TPRLNG approach under different travel demand conditions.
A. Setting of Key Modules
The specific road network of the case study includes the
Liushi Expressway, Shixiang Road, and adjacent bypasses in
Hangzhou, China. We focus on four primary OD pairs of
controlled vehicles. The OD pairs for these groups, along with
their potential routing options, including expressway ramps
and side road selections, are shown in Fig. 4. Table I delineates the specificities of the primary OD pairs, encompassing
the demand and three to four main alternative routes. The road
network spans approximately 7.8 km in the east-west direction,

37597

featuring three entrance ramps and four exit ramps. Vehicles
can freely travel between the two roads via these ramps. The
Liushi Expressway has no traffic lights, with the number of
lanes varying between two and four. In contrast, Shixiang Road
is equipped with traffic lights and primarily consists of two
lanes, with only a few sections expanded to three or four lanes.
According to the local traffic rules, the speed limits are set
as 90 km/h on the Liushi Expressway, 70 km/h on Shixiang
Road, and 60 km/h on other secondary roads. The simulation
model consists of a total number of 4568 links and 2279 nodes.
There are six traffic lights in the parallel arterial and 17 traffic
lights in the secondary road.
In this study, we employ an enhanced Krauss model as
our car-following model, which emphasizes maintaining a
safe following distance. This model assumes that drivers
aim to keep a safe buffer from the vehicle ahead, enabling
sufficient reaction time should the leading vehicle decelerate
abruptly, thereby preventing collisions. The lane-changing
model incorporated in our analysis is structured to first identify
lanes with strategic importance. It then determines velocity
requirements that account for safety and the dynamics of
lane changing, generates lane change requests, and computes
desired speeds for lane changing [44].
To accurately depict the capacities of the road network,
we calculate the capacities of road segments using theoretical
formulas outlined in the SUMO documentation. Specifically,
the capacity for the expressway is calculated at 5538 veh/h,
for parallel arterial at 5194 veh/h, and for Huzhou Road, a
typical secondary road, at 2880 veh/h. It is crucial to note that
theoretical traffic capacities under ideal conditions differ from
actual capacities in simulations due to variable vehicle speeds
and random decelerations influenced by vehicle interaction
models.
Two distinct vehicle types are included in the numerical
study: 1) background traffic and 2) controlled vehicles from
primary OD pairs. Vehicles from the latter category are subject
to routing decisions made by the decision module. This
comprehensive approach allows for a nuanced understanding
of traffic dynamics under the influence of the TP-RLNG
approach.
To verify the robustness of TP-RLNG, this article sets
up scenarios with different travel demand patterns. Here, we
take the concentration level of primary OD pairs as a key
variable. The concentration level is defined as the ratio of
vehicles entering the road network within a narrow time
interval to the total number of vehicles allocated to a specific
OD pair. In other words, we set a constant total vehicular
volume for each OD pair, while focusing on the variation in
temporal distribution, referred to as the concentration level.
Four scenarios with concentration levels of 0%, 25%, 50%,
and 100% are analyzed. A concentration level of zero denotes
a scenario where vehicles are distributed evenly across the
time continuum, entering the road network at a uniform rate;
the 100% concentration level denotes the scenario wherein
all vehicles within this OD pair enter the road network
within a comparatively brief timeframe. It is imperative to
acknowledge that in practical scenarios, traffic flow will not
exhibit 100% concentration. The situation described represents

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37598

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

TABLE II
K EY PARAMETERS IN THE TP-RLNG A PPROACH

a hypothetical model that demonstrates potential extreme
congestion under highly specific and severe conditions.
The hyperparameters of the MDP model and the DRL
algorithm, are meticulously chosen and are comprehensively
detailed in Table II. The DRL control algorithms are implemented using Python 3.8, a programming language widely
recognized for its efficacy in scientific computing and data
analysis.

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF AVERAGE T RAVEL T IMES FOR
D IFFERENT S CENARIOS ( MIN )

TABLE IV
P-VALUE C OMPARED TO THE N O -C ONTROL M ETHOD

B. Result Analysis
In the subsequent sections, we conduct a series of numerical
analyses, including a performance gap analysis, to evaluate
the effectiveness of various routing methods. This analysis
specifically contrasts the performance of existing routing
algorithms, RL algorithms, and our proposed TP-RLNG in
diverse traffic scenarios. Initially, we investigate the influence
of the average travel time. Subsequently, we examine the
impact of the routing methods on different segments of the
road network, focusing on the Liushi Expressway, Shixiang
Road, and adjacent road sections. Last, we select a specific
scenario to analyze the guidance strategies of different routing
methods.
1) Route Guidance Approaches in Comparison: To demonstrate the efficacy of the approach presented in this study, we
compare it against a range of existing algorithms as outlined
below.
No-Control: This baseline approach entails no intervention
in the original road network. The outcomes here reflect the
results of the traffic calibration previously executed.
Selfish-Routing: It replicates the guidance algorithm of current navigation systems. This approach calculates the shortest
travel time route based on real-time detected traffic metrics and
conduct all-or-nothing route guidance for vehicles departing
from the same OD pair during the same time step (no
differentiated guidance).
Preselfish-Routing: In this method, akin to selfish-routing,
we employ predicted future road conditions to determine the
shortest path. It provides traffic prediction based all-or-nothing
route guidance.
HIT2FLS: This approach presents an Adaptive Hierarchical
Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Knowledge Representation system,
enhanced by particle swarm optimization (PSO), for travel
route guidance [45]. This method demonstrates a robust
capability in optimizing traffic flow and minimizing congestion
on a global scale, thereby contributing to the improvement of
urban mobility.

RLNG: The key distinction of this method from the TPRLNG approach lies in its input for the MDP state. Instead
of incorporating predicted traffic flow metrics, it utilizes the
current metrics of the road network for training. This is a
differentiated route guidance method, offering different routes
to vehicles departing from the same OD pair during the same
time step.
These methods will be systematically evaluated to ascertain
the relative performance and impact of the TP-RLNG approach
in optimizing traffic flow and reducing overall travel time in
complex road networks.
This part assesses the effectiveness of different guidance
methods designed to enhance road network efficiency. It does
so by examining two key metrics: 1) the average travel time of
all vehicles traversing the network and 2) the average speed on
specific road segments, namely, Liushi Expressway, Shixiang
Road, and secondary roads.
Table III presents the average travel time and variance under
different travel demand scenarios, alongside the comparative
enhancement values (in brackets) relative to a baseline nocontrol approach.
To evaluate the differences in average travel time across various guidance approaches, an analysis of variance (ANOVA)
is performed. The p-values obtained for all approaches,
when compared to the no-control scenario, are presented in
Table IV. In each paired comparison model, the p-values are
consistently well below 0.01. This indicates robust statistical
evidence supporting the conclusion that all tested navigation
guidance approaches result in significant reductions in average
travel time relative to the no-control baseline.
In no-control, a positive correlation between traffic flow
concentration and travel time is observed. This correlation
is attributed to a controlled constant number of OD pairs
in the road network simulation, where increased commuter
concentration exacerbates congestion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

37599

Fig. 5. Average velocity of Liushi Expressway, Shixiang Road, and Huzhou Road. (a) 0% concentration. (b) 25% concentration. (c) 50% concentration.
(d) 100% concentration.

The performance of selfish-routing is also scrutinized.
The approach demonstrate moderate improvement in demand
concentrations 0%, 25%, and 50%, suggesting their efficiency in mildly fluctuating traffic conditions. However, as
the unpredictability of road network conditions escalates, the
effectiveness of this approach diminishes, particularly in the
high traffic concentration level of 100%. Under stable traffic
conditions, the performance of preselfish-routing is comparable to that of selfish-routing. However, preselfish-routing
significantly outperforms selfish-routing under congestion
oscillation. This improvement can be attributed to the incorporation of traffic flow prediction, which enables the anticipation
of future traffic congestion and the proactive diversion of
vehicles.
HIT2FLS demonstrates a notable degree of optimization
across all four scenarios. It induces a positive enhancement of
the road network condition in scenario 1, 2, 3, and 4.
Regarding the RLNG, it outperforms TP-RLNG under
concentrations 0% and 25%, which are characterized by relatively stable traffic conditions. Conversely, in scenarios with
significant road network changes, the RLNG’s performance is
eclipsed by TP-RLNG.
TP-RLNG demonstrates a narrower performance gap with
RLNG under smooth traffic conditions, while exhibiting superior performance in more complex scenarios. This is likely due
to the integration of a novel traffic prediction module, which
enables more accurate anticipation of future traffic fluctuations
and timely strategy adjustments.
The analysis of average speeds within the road network
focuses on three key road: 1) Liushi Expressway; 2) Shixiang

Road; and 3) Huzhou Road. These roads are selected to
represent the impact of different guidance algorithms on
expressways, parallel arterial roads, and secondary roads,
respectively. The specific results are shown in Fig. 5.
No-Control: Congestion levels are consistently highest on
expressways across all demand scenarios except for scenario4.
Interestingly, secondary roads exhibit a lower level of congestion.
Selfish-Routing: Compared with no-control, selfish-routing
demonstrates a capacity to alleviate congestion on expressways, particularly in scenarios with low concentrations.
However, its effectiveness turns counterproductive under
concentration 100%, adversely affecting expressway traffic
efficiency.
Preselfish-Routing: When traffic flow is relatively stable, the efficiency optimization of road networks through
preselfish-routing is inferior to that of selfish-routing under
concentration 0%. However, under conditions of high traffic
flow instability, preselfish-routing demonstrates significantly
better optimization compared to selfish-routing.
HIT2FLS: In all four scenarios, this method enhances road
network efficiency; however, the overall improvement in road
network efficiency remains relatively modest.
RLNG: It shows a marked improvement in expressway
traffic efficiency across all demand scenarios. The degree
of improvement is more pronounced in low concentration
scenarios than in high concentration scenarios.
TP-RLNG: This approach yields significant optimization for
expressway traffic in all scenarios. However, it tends to have
a negative impact on the traffic flow of secondary roads.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37600

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Time-space velocity diagram of Liushi Expressway. (a) No-control. (b) Selfish-routing. (c) Preselfish-routing. (d) HIT2FLS. (e) RLNG. (f) TP-RLNG.

The findings suggest that while a low concentration of
navigation approaches can enhance traffic efficiency, a high
concentration may prove detrimental. The proposed TP-RLNG
approach stands out for its consistent performance across various travel demand scenarios, offering substantial optimization
for expressways. Nonetheless, it is important to note the
tradeoff, as this optimization comes at the expense of reduced
benefits for secondary road users. This comprehensive analysis
underscores the need for a balanced approach in the implementation of traffic guidance algorithms, considering their varied
impacts on different road types and traffic scenarios.
2) Strategic Analysis: To enhance the comparative analysis
of TP-RLNG against other traffic navigation approaches,
particularly in terms of impact on road network status and
controlled OD queues, this section delves deeper into the
approach’s effects. Building upon the findings discussed in
the preceding section, it is evident that the TP-RLNG’s
superiority over RL becomes increasingly pronounced under
scenarios of high traffic concentration level. Consequently,
we have selected scenario concentration 50% for an in-depth
examination.
The analysis of the impact of various guidance methods
on expressway traffic reveals significant disparities, as shown
in Fig. 6. By comparing different methods, we find that both
selfish-routing and preselfish-routing can reduce the severity and extent of congestion under the no-control scenario,
but the effects are not particularly pronounced. In contrast,
HIT2FLS has little to no impact on mitigating congestion on
expressways. RLNG can alleviate expressway congestion to
a considerable extent, while TP-RLNG is capable of completely eliminating congestion on expressways. This enhanced
performance of TP-RLNG is attributed to its ability to predict
and proactively alleviate upcoming congestion in future traffic
sections, a significant advancement over RLNG’s reactive
guidance strategy.
In Fig. 7, the N-curve analysis shows that all traffic management strategies tested improve vehicle distribution over a

Fig. 7.

N-curve of different approaches.

Fig. 8.

Average travel time under different methods for four OD pairs.

no-control baseline, with TP-RLNG being the most effective
in facilitating earlier arrivals. This strategy is followed in
effectiveness by RLNG, preselfish-routing, selfish-routing, and
HIT2FLS. The analysis reveals that the impact of these
methods on traffic flow does not manifest as abrupt shifts but
rather as a consistent acceleration in vehicle arrivals.
In order to elucidate the strategic efficacy of different
approaches, a comprehensive analysis is conducted focusing
on the travel time across various OD pairs under different
guidance strategies. The average travel times for different OD
pairs are shown in Fig. 8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF G INI C OEFFICIENTS FOR D IFFERENT OD PAIRS

It can be observed that most methods demonstrate a
certain level of effectiveness in optimizing the travel time
of controllable OD pairs. For OD2, most methods are
able to significantly reduce travel time, whereas the degree
of optimization for other OD pairs is relatively small.
Additionally, we note that, in OD4, the proposed TP-RLNG
approach actually increases the travel time for individual users
to some extent. This phenomenon indicates that, during the
process of global optimization, TP-RLNG occasionally prioritizes overall system performance, achieving improvements in
global objectives at the expense of certain users’ interests.
Table V presents the Gini coefficients of travel times for
different OD pairs. It can be observed that the Gini coefficients
of TP-RLNG are higher than those of other methods for OD1,
OD3, and OD4. This also validates the view that TP-RLNG
optimizes overall system performance at the expense of some
users’ interests.
In our approach, the compliance rate of drivers and the
prediction accuracy of traffic flow are critical factors influencing the overall effectiveness of the results. When compliance
rates are low or prediction accuracy is poor, the outcomes
may become suboptimal. To evaluate the robustness under
such conditions, we conduct a sensitivity analysis. Specifically,
scenarios with compliance rates 80% and 90% are simulated,
and noise levels of 10% and 20% are introduced into the
prediction module as inaccurate predicted states. The detailed
results are presented in Table VI. The analysis reveals that
reduced compliance and increased prediction noise both negatively impact performance. For instance, an 80% compliance
rate results in a 5.6% decline compared to full compliance,
while 20% noise leads to an 10.3% decrease relative to
noise-free predictions. Nevertheless, even under the worst-case
scenario, our approach consistently outperforms the RLNG
without traffic flow prediction, underscoring its robustness and
effectiveness.
V. C ONCLUSION
The objective of this study is to overcome the limitations
inherent in conventional navigation systems, which are primarily characterized by two significant shortcomings: 1) the
prevalent use of “all-or-nothing” traffic guidance often results
in navigation-induced congestion, and 2) existing guidance
methods lack predictive capabilities, leading to congestion
oscillation. To mitigate navigation-induced congestion, we
propose the implementation of multi OD differentiated guidance. Additionally, to avoid the congestion oscillation, we
introduce traffic flow prediction mechanisms. To this end,
we introduce an expressway guidance approach leveraging

37601

TABLE VI
S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF S YSTEM T RAVEL T IME ( MIN )

traffic flow prediction and RL. This approach integrates traffic
flow predictions into a MDP model, representing a significant
advancement over existing approaches.
The TP-RLNG approach employs an VDAC method to
identify optimal solutions. We validate the approach’s efficacy through microsimulation in the SUMO traffic simulation
environment, focusing on the Liushi Expressway and adjacent roads in Hangzhou, China. Comparative analyses are
conducted between TP-RLNG and existing routing algorithms
under a variety of traffic demand scenarios. Our findings reveal
that while TP-RLNG demonstrates comparable performance
to the RLNG under low traffic concentrations, it significantly
outperforms them in high traffic concentration scenarios.
Although widely used navigation algorithms can enhance road
network efficiency in certain cases, they may also exacerbate
congestion in others. Incorporating traffic flow predictions
into navigation systems can significantly enhance their reliability. The TP-RLNG approach shows robust performance
across diverse scenarios, though it occasionally prioritizes
global optimization at the expense of individual user benefits.
Experimental results indicate that the differentiated guidance
of multiple OD pairs can globally optimize transportation
systems and mitigate navigation congestion. However, this
approach does not address the reliability issues of guidance
systems. While integrating traffic flow prediction into guidance
systems enhances their stability, it falls short of achieving
global optimization. The optimal solution emerges from combining traffic flow prediction with differentiated guidance,
effectively balancing system-wide efficiency and reliability.
Looking forward, we identify several avenues for enhancing
this approach. First, incorporating fairness into the reward
function of the MDP is crucial, as the current algorithm
does not consider the individual impact of suggested routes.
Additionally, integrating DL-based traffic prediction models
with traffic flow data could enrich the MDP state space,
offering more nuanced guidance. Lastly, synergizing the guidance algorithm with traffic management strategies like ramp
control and variable speed limits could further optimize road
network efficiency. In the application of this approach within
real-world traffic systems, emphasis should be placed on
obtaining the data required for route guidance optimization
and establishing the communication channels for transmitting
guidance strategies. For traffic data collection, existing road
detection equipment can be utilized, including loop detectors, microwave sensors, video surveillance systems, FCD,
and various data collection terminals equipped with GPS.
Regarding the dissemination of guided routes, personalized
route recommendations can be provided through navigation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

37602

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 18, 15 SEPTEMBER 2025

software, which can be implemented via mobile phones,
in-vehicle navigation systems, or C-ITS and other terminal
devices. This hardware support infrastructure can effectively
meet the needs of real-time traffic information collection and
route guidance, providing the necessary technical foundation
for the practical application of the method.
In summary, this research marks a significant step toward
more proactive and adaptive traffic management, with the
potential to substantially improve congestion and overall road
network performance.

[22] G. H. Bham and R. F. Benekohal, “A high fidelity traffic simulation
model based on cellular automata and car-following concepts,” Transp.
Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–32, 2004.
[23] G. F. Newell, “A simplified car-following theory: A lower order model,”
Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 195–205, 2002.
[24] M. Fellendorf and P. Vortisch, “Microscopic traffic flow simulator
VISSIM,” in Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation, J. Barceló, Ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2010, pp. 63–93.
[25] D. Krajzewicz, G. Hertkorn, C. Feld, and P. Wagner, “SUMO (simulation
of urban mobility); an open-source traffic simulation,” in Proc. 4th
Middle East Symp. Simul. Modelling (MESM), 2002, pp. 183–187.
[26] Z. Zhang, C. Fang, J. Zhang, J. Qian, and Q. Su, “Traffic guidance based
on LSTM neural network and dual tracking Dijkstra algorithm,” in Proc.
IEEE 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Comput. Aided Educ. (ICISCAE), 2020,
pp. 497–503.
[27] D. Neiman, Z. Rubinstein, and S. Smith, “Dynamic route guidance in
vehicle networks by simulating future traffic patterns,” in Proc. Int.
FLAIRS Conf., vol. 36, 2023, pp. 1–7.
[28] Y. Wu, H. Tan, L. Qin, and B. Ran, “Differential variable speed limits
control for freeway recurrent bottlenecks via deep actor-critic algorithm,”
Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 117, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 102649.
[29] Z. Shi, M. Xu, Y. Song, and Z. Zhu, “Multi-platform dynamic game
and operation of hybrid bike-sharing systems based on reinforcement
learning,” Transp. Res. E, Logist. Transp. Rev., vol. 181, Jan. 2024,
Art. no. 103374.
[30] Z. Zhu, J. Ke, and H. Wang, “A mean-field Markov decision process
model for spatial-temporal subsidies in ride-sourcing markets,” Transp.
Res. B, Methodol., vol. 150, pp. 540–565, Aug. 2021.
[31] L. Wang et al., “Comparing AI and human decision-making mechanisms
in daily collaborative experiments,” iScience, vol. 28, no. 6, 2025,
Art. no. 112711.
[32] C. Mao and Z. Shen, “A reinforcement learning framework for the
adaptive routing problem in stochastic time-dependent network,” Transp.
Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 93, pp. 179–197, Aug. 2018.
[33] D. Lee, “Transfer learning-based deep reinforcement learning approach
for robust route guidance in mixed traffic environment,” IEEE Access,
vol. 12, pp. 61667–61680, 2024.
[34] W. Pan and S. Q. Liu, “Deep reinforcement learning for the dynamic
and uncertain vehicle routing problem,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 405–422, 2023.
[35] Z. Qi, L. Wang, Z. Jiang, Z. Zhu, and D.-H. Lee, “Carbon emissionfocused dynamic eco-route guidance design for urban expressway
systems,” Transportmetrica B, Transp. Dyn., vol. 13, no. 1, 2025,
Art. no. 2491673.
[36] R. Basso, B. Kulcsár, I. Sanchez-Diaz, and X. Qu, “Dynamic stochastic
electric vehicle routing with safe reinforcement learning,” Transp. Res.
E, Logist. Transp. Rev., vol. 157, Jan. 2022, At. no. 102496.
[37] J. Zhao, M. Mao, X. Zhao, and J. Zou, “A hybrid of deep reinforcement learning and local search for the vehicle routing problems,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 7208–7218,
Nov. 2021.
[38] R. Qi, J. Qing Li, J. Wang, H. Jin, and Y. Yan Han, “QMOEA: A
Q-learning-based multiobjective evolutionary algorithm for solving timedependent green vehicle routing problems with time windows,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 608, pp. 178–201, Aug. 2022.
[39] D. Lee, S. Tak, and S. Kim, “Development of reinforcement learningbased traffic predictive route guidance algorithm under uncertain traffic
environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 58623–58634, 2022.
[40] P. A. Lopez et al., “Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO,” in
Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), 2018, pp. 2575–2582.
[41] A. Wegener, M. Piórkowski, M. Raya, H. Hellbrück, S. Fischer,
and J.-P. Hubaux, “TraCI: An interface for coupling road traffic and
network simulators,” in Proc. 11th Commun. Netw. Simul. Symp., 2008,
pp. 155–163.
[42] P. M. Ejercito, K. G. E. Nebrija, R. P. Feria, and L. L. Lara-Figueroa,
“Traffic simulation software review,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Inf., Intell.,
Syst. Appl. (IISA), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[43] J. Su, S. Adams, and P. Beling, “Value-decomposition multi-agent
actor-critics,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, 2021,
pp. 11352–11360.
[44] J. Erdmann, “SUMO’s lane-changing model,” in Modeling Mobility
with Open Data. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 105–123.
[Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3319-15024-6_7
[45] M. Zouari, N. Baklouti, J. Sanchez-Medina, H. M. Kammoun,
M. B. Ayed, and A. M. Alimi, “PSO-based adaptive hierarchical interval
type-2 fuzzy knowledge representation system (PSO-AHIT2FKRS) for
travel route guidance,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 804–818, Feb. 2022.

R EFERENCES
[1] C. Higgins, M. Sweet, and P. Kanaroglou, “All minutes are not equal:
Travel time and the effects of congestion on commute satisfaction in
Canadian cities,” Transportation, vol. 45, pp. 1249–1268, Sep. 2018.
[2] T. Roughgarden and E. Tardos, “How bad is selfish routing?” in Proc.
41st Annu. Symp. Found.Comput. Sci., 2000, pp. 93–102.
[3] M. Wardman, P. W. Bonsall, and J. D. Shires, “Driver response to
variable message signs: A stated preference investigation,” Transp. Res.
C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 389–405, 1997.
[4] D. Large, G. Burnett, S. Benford, and K. Oliver, “Crowdsourcing
good landmarks for in-vehicle navigation systems,” Behav. Inf. Technol.,
vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[5] T. Fukuda, K. Takefuji, Y. Ikemoto, and Y. Hasegawa, “Dynamical
route-planning for vehicles based on global traffic information and
communication,” in Proc. IEEE ITS Conf., 2002, pp. 538–543.
[6] S. Koh et al., “Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle
navigation,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 96, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 106694.
[7] J. J. Kponyo, Y. Kuang, and Z. Li, “Real time status collection and
dynamic vehicular traffic control using ant colony optimization,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Comput. Problem-Solving (ICCP), 2012, pp. 69–72.
[8] Y. Liu, G.-L. Chang, and J. Yu, “An integrated control model for freeway
corridor under nonrecurrent congestion,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1404–1418, May 2011.
[9] Y.-C. Chiu and N. Huynh, “Location configuration design for dynamic
message signs under stochastic incident and ATIS scenarios,” Transp.
Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 33–50, 2007.
[10] Y. Wang, M. Papageorgiou, and A. Messmer, “Feedback and iterative
routing strategies for freeway networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Control Appl. (CCA), 2001, pp. 1162–1167.
[11] Y. Wang, M. Papageorgiou, and A. Messmer, “A predictive feedback
routing control strategy for freeway network traffic,” in Proc. Amer.
Control Conf., vol. 5, 2002, pp. 3606–3611.
[12] Z. Liang and Y. Wakahara, “Real-time urban traffic amount prediction
models for dynamic route guidance systems,” EURASIP J. Wireless
Commun. Netw., vol. 2014, no. 1, p. 85, May 2014.
[13] E. Angelelli, I. Arsik, V. Morandi, M. Savelsbergh, and M. G. Speranza,
“Proactive route guidance to avoid congestion,” Transp. Res. B,
Methodol., vol. 94, pp. 1–21, Dec. 2016.
[14] C. van Hinsbergen, J. van Lint, and F. Sanders, “Short term traffic
prediction models,” in Proc. 14th World Congr. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
2007, pp. 1–18.
[15] Z. Zhu, B. Peng, C. Xiong, and L. Zhang, “Short-term traffic flow
prediction with linear conditional Gaussian Bayesian network,” J. Adv.
Transp., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1111–1123, 2016.
[16] G. Guo and T. Zhang, “A residual spatio-temporal architecture for travel
demand forecasting,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 115, Jun.
2020, Art. no. 102639.
[17] X. He, Y. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Qin, C. Wu, and W. Lu, “Short-term traffic
flow prediction via weight optimization of composite models,” Transp.
Lett., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 395–405, 2025.
[18] M. Xu, Y. Di, H. Ding, Z. Zhu, X. Chen, and H. Yang, “AGNP: Networkwide short-term probabilistic traffic speed prediction and imputation,”
Commun. Transp. Res., vol. 3, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 100099.
[19] Z. Zhu, M. Xu, J. Ke, H. Yang, and X. M. Chen, “A Bayesian clustering ensemble Gaussian process model for network-wide traffic flow
clustering and prediction,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 148,
Mar. 2023, Art. no. 104032.
[20] Bharti, B. Naheliya, and K. Kumar, “Short-term traffic flow prediction
in heterogeneous traffic conditions using Gaussian process regression,” Int. J. Inf. Technol., to be published. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s41870-024-01902-1
[21] C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wan, J. Luan, and Q. Pei, “Traffic flow prediction
based on deep learning in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3776–3789, Jun. 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: PROACTIVE URBAN EXPRESSWAY GUIDANCE: A HYBRID APPROACH

Linghao Wang received the B.S. degree from
the College of Civil Engineering and Architecture,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2024,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Institute of Intelligent Transportation Systems,
College of Civil Engineering and Architecture.
His research interests include reinforcement
learning in traffic guidance system.

Zheyuan Jiang received the B.E. degree in
intelligent transportation engineering from Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2022. He is
currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the Institute
of Intelligent Transportation Systems, Polytechnic
Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
His research interests include traffic control in
urban expressways, traffic guidance system, and
reinforcement learning.

Ziyue Qi received the B.E. degree in traffic engineering from Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing,
China, in 2022. She is currently pursuing the the
master’s degree with the Polytechnic Institute and
the Institute of Intelligent Transportation Systems,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
Her research interests include eco-routing in traffic guidance system and transportation network
modeling.

37603

Ziyi Shi received the B.E. degree in traffic
engineering from Beijing Jiaotong University,
Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the Institute of
Intelligent Transportation Systems, College of Civil
Engineering and Architecture, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.
His research interests include multimodal
transportation and reinforcement learning.

Xiqun Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Civil
Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2008 and 2013, respectively.
He is currently a tenured Professor with Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, the Director of the
Institute of Intelligent Transportation Systems, and
the Vice Dean of Zhejiang University—University
of Illinois Urbana–Champaign Institute, Champaign,
IL, USA. He has published over 100 peer-reviewed
journal articles and over 70 conference papers. His
research interests include intelligent transportation systems, shared mobility on
demand, simulation-based optimization, and transportation big data analytics.
Dr. Chen received the National Excellent Young Scholars Award of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China, the Science and Technology
Innovation Youth Award of the China Communications and Transportation
Association, the Science and Technology Award of the China Intelligent
Transportation Systems Association, the 2013 IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Society Best Ph.D. Dissertation Award, and the best paper awards at
six international conferences.

Zheng Zhu received the B.E. degree from
the Department of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2008, the first
M.S. degree from the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA, in 2014, the second
M.S. degree from the Department of Mathematics,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, in
2017, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, in 2018.
He is a Hundred Talents Program Professor, an Assistant Department
Head with the College of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. He has been studying and working with
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA; Maryland National Transportation Center, Baltimore, MD; Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong; HKUST-DiDi
Joint Research Laboratory. He has published over 60 SCI papers in top
transportation journals, the H-index on Google scholar is 24.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:03:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

