IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

1243

A Bi-Level Network-Wide Cooperative Driving
Approach Including Deep Reinforcement
Learning-Based Routing
Jiawei Zhang , Jingwei Ge , Shu Li , Shen Li , Member, IEEE, and Li Li , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Cooperative driving of connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) has attracted extensive attention and researchers
have proposed various approaches. However, existing approaches
are limited to small-scale isolated scenarios and gaps remain in
network-wide cooperative driving, especially in routing. In this
article, we decompose the network-level cooperative driving problem into two dominant sub-problems and accordingly propose a
bi-level network-wide cooperative driving approach. The dynamic
routing problem is considered in the upper level and we propose
a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based routing
model. The model can promote the equilibrium of network-wide
traffic through distributed self-organized routing collaboration
among vehicles, thereby improving efficiency for both individual
vehicles and global traffic systems. In the lower level, we focus on the
right-of-way assignment problem at signal-free intersections and
propose an adaptive cooperative driving algorithm. The algorithm
can adaptively evaluate priorities of different lanes, and then uses
the lane priorities to guide the Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS)
for better right-of-way assignments. Essentially, the upper level
determines which conflict areas the vehicles will pass through, and
the lower level addresses how the vehicles use the limited road
resources more efficiently in each conflict area. The experimental
results show that the upper and lower levels complement each other
and work together to significantly improve the network-wide traffic
efficiency and reduce the travel time of individual vehicles. Moreover, the results demonstrate that microscopic and mesoscopic
cooperative driving behaviors of vehicles can significantly benefit
the macroscopic traffic system.
Index Terms—Connected and automated vehicles (CAVs),
Network-wide cooperative driving, Routing, Deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), Intersection management.

Manuscript received 25 July 2023; accepted 13 August 2023. Date of publication 16 August 2023; date of current version 23 February 2024. This work
was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2020AAA0108104, and in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 52272420. (Corresponding authors:
Shen Li; Li Li.)
Jiawei Zhang, Jingwei Ge, and Shu Li are with the Department
of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail:
zhangjw20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; gjw19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; shuli19@
mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Shen Li is with the Department of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: sli299@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Li Li is with the Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: li-li@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2023.3305818.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIV.2023.3305818

I. INTRODUCTION
ONNECTED and automated vehicles (CAVs) are expected to significantly improve the safety and efficiency of
autonomous driving and are considered the crucial component
of the next-generation transportation system [1], [2], [3], [4], [5],
[6], [7], [8]. With V2X communication, researchers are working
to promote cooperative driving of vehicles to fully utilize the
advantages of CAVs [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16].
The research on boosting traffic efficiency with CAVs can
be broadly categorized into two evolutionary threads. The first
evolutionary thread begins with isolated single intersections,
then gradually expands to multiple intersections and the ultimate
goal, i.e., road networks [17]. Research on single intersections
has received a lot of attention and accumulation. Existing approaches generally improve intersection efficiency by removing
traffic signals and working to solve better right-of-way assignments [9], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. Representative approaches
include reservation based algorithm [23], dynamic resequencing
(DR) based algorithm [24], tree search based algorithm [25],
[26], and deep learning based algorithm [9]. Then, as the development of the approaches for single intersections has reached
a performance ceiling, the expansion from single intersections
to multiple intersections [27], [28] and even road networks has
attracted more and more research interests. Carlson et al. [29]
propose a greedy search strategy. Pei et al. [30] design a distributed strategy for the coordination of adjacent intersections.
However, due to the complexity of the road network planning
problem and the severe coupling between sub-problems, there
are still gaps in network-wide approaches [16], [17].
The second evolutionary thread is from traffic-responsive
feedback control to planning based feedforward control [31],
[32]. Most traditional approaches conform to the concept of
feedback control because they specify control commands in
response to the current state of the traffic system [33], [34],
[35], [36], [37], [38]. Recently, thanks to the more fine-grained
traffic information available within the CAV environment, traffic control approaches have gradually integrated the concept
of feedforward control, such as feedforward trajectory planning [26], [39], [40], [41]. We are able to take preemptive
control commands through state prediction, which can effectively improve the stability and efficiency of the traffic system.
To this end, Guo et al. [31] point out that the driver guidance
system has great potential to take full advantage of CAVs by

C

2379-8858 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed bi-level network-wide cooperative driving approach. In the upper level, the multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
based dynamic routing model takes the traffic state information from the macroscopic system as input and outputs the mesoscopic routing choices. In the lower
level, the tree search based intersection cooperative driving algorithm takes the traffic state information from the mesoscopic system as input and outputs the
microscopic passing order, i.e., the right-of-way assignment of vehicles passing through the conflict areas.

providing instructions to vehicles on how to properly operate
to achieve certain objectives (e.g., reduce travel time, minimize
fuel consumption, etc.). However, routing choice, as one of the
most prominent guidance ways, still has research gaps.
Therefore, in summary, the current research suffers from
two critical deficiencies. First, existing approaches are limited to small-scale isolated scenarios (e.g., intersections, on/off-ramps) and only consider traffic information in a small
spatial-temporal range. Deploying these approaches directly to
road network scenarios will lead to a prominent issue, i.e.,
many vehicles will queue beyond the control zone, and thus
their efficiency will be seriously weakened [16]. Second, and
more prominently, there are still gaps in network-wide planning
problems due to the complexity of the problem. The complexity
of the network-wide planning problem increases dramatically
with the number of intersections and vehicles, while there are
causal loops that are difficult to solve directly [17], [30].
To address the above deficiencies, we decompose the networklevel cooperative driving problem into two sub-problems and
accordingly propose a bi-level network-wide cooperative driving approach, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The upper level solves
the dynamic routing problem, and the lower level solves the
right-of-way assignment problem at intersections. The upper
level provides long-term plans for vehicles to decide which
conflict areas the vehicles will pass through; the lower level
provides short-term plans for vehicles to interact with other
vehicles when they pass through the conflict areas. The upper
and lower levels will complement each other and work together
to reduce vehicles’ travel time and improve the traffic system’s
efficiency and equilibrium.
Specifically, for the upper level, we propose a multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based routing model, aiming
to promote the collaboration of vehicles on routing choices.

We comprehensively analyze the characteristics of the routing
problem and propose a dynamic routing decision principle of
“Consider two steps, take one step”, and accordingly design the
observation space for DRL agent. Meanwhile, inspired by the
idea of backpressure control in wireless communication [42],
[43], we propose a backpressure based reward function. The
reward function can guide the DRL agent to learn routing policy
that can improve efficiency and enhance the equilibrium of the
network-wide traffic system. In particular, the relative nature
of the backpressure based reward significantly enhances the
generalizability and scalability of the routing model.
For the lower level, we propose an adaptive cooperative
driving algorithm for CAVs at signal-free intersections, aiming
to reduce the travel delay of vehicles passing through intersections while effectively avoiding congestion at microscopic
intersections. The proposed algorithm can adaptively prioritize
lanes based on the queuing length and the traffic flow rate, and
then schedule right-of-way assignment of conflict zone accordingly. Compared to the existing cooperative driving algorithms,
the proposed adaptive cooperative driving algorithm is more
efficient for network-wide traffic systems by making crucial
improvements in both spatial and temporal dimensions. In the
spatial dimension, the adaptive cooperative driving algorithm
takes into account a larger range of state information, which
can effectively address the deficiencies that existing algorithms
cause vehicles to queue beyond the control zone [16]. In the
temporal dimension, the adaptive cooperative driving algorithm
not only considers the current state information but also indirectly incorporates the future state of the intersection, which
will improve the robustness and predictability of the lower-level
intersection system.
The experimental results show that the proposed networkwide cooperative driving approach can boost the efficiency

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

Fig. 2.

1245

Overall framework of the bi-level network-wide cooperative driving approach for CAV swarms.

of network-wide CAVs, promote the equilibrium of networkwide traffic, and prevent the road network from being paralyzed under congested traffic conditions. For individual vehicles, the proposed approach significantly reduces travel time
under any traffic conditions; for the network-wide traffic system, the macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD) [44], [45]
curve is evidently raised, which indicates that the performance
has been comprehensively improved. The experimental results
also demonstrate that the microscopic and mesoscopic behaviors of individual vehicles will lead to significant differences
at the macroscopic traffic level, which provides a systematic
perspective for the design of autonomous driving approaches
and the management methods for the emerging intelligent traffic system. More generally, the proposed approach provides a
general framework and corresponding methods for CAV swarms
cooperative driving at the road network level, effectively solving the challenges encountered when the cooperative driving
methods transition from isolated scenarios to network-wide
scenarios.
In addition, the boundaries of the problem studied in this
article need to be clarified. First, we work to improve the
performance of macroscopic traffic systems via the microscopic
self-organized behaviors of individual vehicles. Therefore, the
object of study is the macroscopic network-wide CAV traffic
system, but the proposed methods are intended for microscopic
individual vehicles. Second, the upper level aims to solve the
problem of distributed and self-organized dynamic routing problem, rather than the centralized traffic assignment problem.
Third, in the lower level, microscopic intersections adopt the
cooperative driving scheme, which turns signalized intersections
to be signal-free. Thus, the core issue is the efficient assignment
of right-of-way in conflict areas [9].

To better present our work, the rest of this article is organized
as follows. Section II presents the bi-level framework for the
network-wide cooperative driving approach. Section III introduces the upper-level multi-agent DRL based routing model.
Section IV presents the lower-level adaptive cooperative driving algorithm. Section V presents the numerical experiments.
Finally, we conclude the article in Section VI.
II. A BI-LEVEL FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK-WIDE
COOPERATIVE DRIVING
This section presents the bi-level framework for the networkwide cooperative driving approach. The framework of the proposed approach is illustrated in Fig. 2, where we take two
levels, i.e., dynamic routing in the upper level and cooperative
driving at signal-free intersections in the lower level, to solve
the right-of-way assignment problem that plays a dominant
impact on network-wide traffic performance [16], [17]. Here,
it is noteworthy that the upper and lower levels are seriously
coupled. The upper level implicitly determines the number of
vehicles, state information, and spatio-temporal location of the
lower-level right-of-way conflicting. In turn, the lower-level
right-of-way conflicting provides crucial decision-making bases
for upper-level routing to improve the utilization of limited road
resources. Accordingly, we propose the bi-level approach as
shown in Fig. 2, and the main ideas of the proposed methods
for the upper and lower levels are presented below.
A. Upper-Level Dynamic Routing
The upper level is to plan routes for arriving vehicles based
on real-time traffic information, aiming to reduce the travel
time of vehicles while promoting the equilibrium of traffic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

flow and thus improving overall efficiency. In the general road
network, routing essentially decides which conflict areas (i.e.,
intersections) vehicles will pass through. We can abstractly consider the routing decision as the mapping from real-time traffic
information to candidate routes, as illustrated in Fig. 2. However,
the route mapping problem has several critical challenges.
First, the mapping from real-time traffic information to routes
is complicated and implicit. It is difficult to design a theoretical
formula to achieve the desired mapping performance. Second,
for the route mapping problem, the system model is unknown
and stochastic. A crucial reason is that we consider the lowerlevel cooperative driving at intersections simultaneously, resulting in many unpredictable uncertainties for the network-wide
traffic system. Third, the benefits of a routing decision can only
be evaluated after the corresponding vehicle executes the chosen
routes, resulting in a severe delay in the feedback of the system
on the route mapping.
To address these challenges, we use DRL to learn the desired
routing policy because (1) DRL agent learns the mapping from
real-time traffic information to routes with deep neural networks,
which can effectively cope with the nonlinearity of the mapping
and even have great potential for learning the desired abstract
mapping relationship [46]; (2) DRL conducts trial-and-error
learning by interacting with the simulation environment without
the requirement of knowing the system model [47], [48], allowing us to consider the lower-level complex cooperative driving at
intersections simultaneously; (3) DRL can effectively deal with
the challenge of feedback delay [49]. We will present the DRL
based routing model in detail in Section III.
B. Lower-Level Adaptive Cooperative Driving At Intersections
The core issue of the lower-level cooperative driving algorithm at microscopic intersections is to assign the conflicting right-of-way for vehicles passing through the intersection.
However, the existing cooperative driving algorithms at isolated
intersections have three deficiencies. (1) From the perspective
of spatial range, the existing algorithms only consider the information in the control zone and aim to schedule vehicles in the
control zone to pass the intersection more efficiently. However,
in network-wide traffic, only considering the vehicles in the
control zone will cause many vehicles to queue outside the
control zone, and thus their efficiency will be seriously weakened. (2) From the perspective of temporal scale, each round of
planning of the existing algorithms is usually independent and
only considers the information at the current moment, without
considering the continuity of the traffic system, especially the
predictable evolution of the intersection system. (3) The results
in [18] show that although a better passing order can improve
the overall efficiency of the intersection system, it will cause
some vehicles to make efficiency sacrifices. That is, the existing
algorithms do not consider the fairness of vehicles. When these
algorithms are directly deployed to the network-wide traffic, it
will lead to a long travel time for some vehicles.
To address these deficiencies, we propose the lower-level
adaptive cooperative driving algorithm for intersections in road

networks. Our algorithm aims to enable cooperative driving at
microscopic intersections to consider a broader range of traffic
information in the spatial dimension and consider the future state
of the intersection system in the temporal dimension. It will
not only shorten the delays of vehicles within the control zone,
but also promote vehicles on lanes with longer queuing lengths
and greater flow rates to pass through the intersection with
higher priority, thus improving the efficiency of the traffic system
and promoting fairness between vehicles. We will present the
lower-level adaptive cooperative driving algorithm in details in
Section V.
III. MULTI-AGENT DRL BASED ROUTING MODEL
In this section, we present the multi-agent DRL based routing
model in detail. Section III-A analyses the problem context of
routing. Section III-B presents the formulated reinforcement
learning setup for routing. Section III-C introduces the reinforcement learning algorithm for routing.
A. Problem Context of Routing
Network-wide traffic system is a typical self-driven particle
system [50]. Each vehicle has its origin and destination and
independently makes routing decisions according to real-time
traffic states. Meanwhile, different routing decisions may lead
to direct or indirect interactions between vehicles with varying
degrees and ranges of impact. To reduce the travel time of
individual vehicles and improve the efficiency of the whole
traffic system, we desire that vehicles can dynamically choose
better routes according to the real-time evolving traffic states,
i.e., the upper-level dynamic routing problem.
However, from a systematic perspective, the dynamic routing
problem has the two critical characteristics. First, since the
state transition of an individual vehicle is not only directly
influenced by the ego routing decision but also indirectly influenced by the decisions of other vehicles, the routing problem for vehicles essentially constitutes a multi-agent system.
To simultaneously improve the efficiency of individual vehicles and the overall system, there is not only competition
for limited road resources between vehicles but also a need
to collaborate to achieve more efficient utilization of road
resources.
Second, routing should be based on appropriate spatial-range
traffic information. There are three crucial reasons for this.
(1) We need to make a trade-off between performance and
problem complexity. Considering too large a spatial range will
lead to a dramatic increase in the state space of the routing
problem, which will cause great learning difficulty for the DRL
agent. (2) The traffic system evolves stochastically and is subject to many perturbations, uncertainties, and even faults [51],
[52]. It is not advisable to consider traffic information with
too large a spatial range for routing because it will cause the
DRL agent that considers traffic states that the vehicle will
never experience (because by the time the vehicle arrives at
the corresponding spatio-temporal location, the traffic state will
have already changed). (3) According to the current situation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

1247

Fig. 3. Dynamic routing problem formulation and corresponding reinforcement learning setup. (a) An illustration of the routing problem formulation. The
red-shaded lanes are the candidate routes, and the blue-shaded lanes are the subsequent lanes corresponding to the two candidate routes. The traffic state information
on the green-shaded area is the critical basis for dynamic routing decisions. The blue-dotted routes indicate the shortest subsequent routes for the candidate routes
to the destination. (b) Observation Space Ω = [ΩO , ΩT ], where the left subfigure is one-step range observation ΩO = [ΩRoute
, ΩIntersection,k
{k = #0,#1-1,#1-2}]
O
O

and the right subfigure is two-step range observation ΩT = [ΩRoute
, ΩIntersection,k
{k = #2-1,#2-2}]. Furthermore, for ease of reading, it is necessary to illustrate
T
T
the intersection markers. For example, Node # 1-2 refers to the second intersection that is one step away from the current node. And so on for the rest.

and conception of the CAV environment, the spatial information available in real time from the vehicles’ perspective is
limited.
Therefore, we propose a routing principle of “Consider two
steps, take one step” and formulate the routing decision problem
as illustrated in Fig. 3. Specifically, when arriving at an intersection node, the ego vehicle needs to choose a route within a
one-step space from the candidate routes to drive (i.e., Take one
step) based on the traffic state information within the two-step
space (i.e., Consider two steps). Taking the scenario shown in
Fig. 3(a) as an example, the ego vehicle can access the traffic
information in the green-shaded area with the support of V2X
communication. The routing model needs to consider the traffic
information in the two-step range. i.e., from Node #0 to Node
#1 (including Node #1-1 and #1-2) and Node #1 to Node #2
(including Node #2-1, #2-2, and #2-3), called “Consider two
steps.” Based on the information in the two-step range, the ego
vehicle chooses a route within the one-step range and drives
accordingly, called “Take one step.” Without loss of generality,
when the vehicle arrives at Node #1-1 or Node #1-2, a similar
routing decision will be conducted until it reaches its destination. It should be illustrated that we consider a general urban
network-wide traffic so that at any intersection node, the vehicle
will generally have one or two candidate routing choices, and
when there are two candidate routing choices, the corresponding
routing decision needs to be made. Moreover, the following
reinforcement learning setup is scalable for scenarios with more
candidate routes and the corresponding models can be obtained
with analogical settings.

B. Reinforcement Learning Setup
In the multi-agent system formed by routing problem, all
vehicle share the system state st , but each vehicle can only
observe partial information ot about the system state st at
time t. Based on the observed information ot , vehicle will
sample a route action at from the shared routing decision
policy πθ :
at ∼ πθ (at | ot )

(1)

where θ is the parameter of the routing policy πθ . The vehicle
executes route action at and arrives at a new observation ot+1 .
Since routing is a fully decentralized and independent decision
process, we can formulate the multi-agent routing problem as
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) from
the perspective of the individual vehicles. Formally, a POMDP
can be described as a 6-tuple (S, A, P, R, Ω, O) [53], [54],
which comprises state space S, action space A, state transition
model P, reward function R, the observation space Ω (ot ∈ Ω),
and the observation probability distribution O for a given system
state st (ot ∼ O(st )). Here, since each vehicle executes action
at in a fully independent manner, the state transition model P is
unknown from the perspective of the vehicle. In the following,
we will present in detail the observation space Ω, action space
A, and reward functions R, which are the core components of
the DRL based routing model.
1) Observation Space Ω: According to the “Consider two
steps, take one step” routing decision principle proposed above,
we will set two types of information to construct the observation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

space
Ω = [ΩO , ΩT ]

(2)

from the perspective of spatial scope, namely: a) One-step range
observation ΩO and b) Two-step range observation ΩT . Here,
we use the scenario shown in Fig. 3(a) as an example to introduce the detailed composition of the two types of observation
information.
a) One-step range observation ΩO : The one-step range
observation ΩO encodes state information within the spatial
range of the one-intersection domain, i.e., from Node #0 to Node
#1-1 and Node #1-2, providing the critical information for “Take
one step”. Among various traffic information, two critical pieces
of information will affect the performance of routing decision,
which will be encoded into the one-step range observation:
, ΩIntersection,k
{k = #0, #1-1, #1-2}]
ΩO = [ΩRoute
O
O

(3)

As illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the first one Ωroute
= [NjRoute {j =
O
1, 2}] is the number of vehicles on the one-step range candidate
routes. Specifically, N1Route is the number of vehicles on the first
candidate route between Node #0 and Node #1-1; N2Route is the
number of vehicles on the second candidate route between Node
is the traffic states
#0 and Node #1-2. The second one Ωintersection,k
O
at the intersection k{k = #0, #1-1, #1-2}, i.e., Node #0, Node
#1-1, and Node #1-2. Especially for the second one, we encode
, i.e.,
three types of information into Ωintersection,k
O
ΩIntersection,k
= [NiIntersection,k {i = 1, . . . , 4},
O
Intersection,k
Intersection,k
, NTo
{j = 1, 2}]
MSteer,j
route j

(4)

considering the dominant influence on vehicles passing through
the intersections. The first type NiIntersection,k is the number of
vehicles in each direction i{i = 1, . . . , 4} at the intersection k
since it will directly affect the time taken for the ego vehicle
Intersection,k
is the
to pass the intersections. The second type MSteer,j
steering type at the intersection k correspond to candidate route
j{j = 1, 2}. Different candidate routes correspond to different
steering types, which will lead to different types of right-ofway conflicts [16], and then, the priority of the ego vehicle
passing through the intersections will be affected under the
lower-level adaptive cooperative driving algorithm. The third
Intersection,k
is the number of vehicles at the intersection
type NTo
route j
k that will drive into the candidate route j{j = 1, 2}, which
provides information about the future state of the candidate
routes and will directly affect the travel efficiency of the ego
vehicle.
Here, to distinguish the control zone defined at microscopic
intersections (see Section IV for more details), we define the
view zone with radius Lview , as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). The
roadside unit can access the state information and driving intentions of vehicles in the view zone. Therefore, we count the state
information within the view zone to compose the observation of
corresponding intersections. Moreover, without loss of generality, we encode the current intersection information by taking
the ego vehicle as a reference and rotating clockwise from the
direction in which the vehicle is located.

b) Two-step range observation ΩT : The two-step range
observation ΩT encodes state information in the spatial range
of the two-intersection domain, providing the key information
for “Consider two steps”. Here, considering the randomness
of the traffic system and the existence of nodes with only one
subsequent candidate route, we take Node #1-1 and Node #1-2
as the starting nodes to solve for the subsequent static shortest
routes, respectively, and accordingly determine the two nodes in
the two-intersection domain. For example, as shown in Fig. 3(a),
the shortest route starting from Node #1-1 is shown as the
blue-dashed line, and thus Node #2-1 is chosen as one of the
two-intersection domain nodes. Similar to the one-step range
observation ΩO , we encode the number of vehicles at the two
intersections and the number of vehicles on the corresponding
routes to constitute the two-step range observation ΩT ,
ΩT = [ΩRoute
, ΩIntersection,k
{k = #2-1,#2-2}]
T
T

(5)

as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). Similarly, without loss of generality,
we encode the state information by taking the candidate routes
as a reference and rotating clockwise.
2) Action Space A: Action at is the routing decision made
by policy πθ based on the observation information ot . As formulated in Section III-A, the action space consists of candidate
routing choices. Within a typical urban road network, there are
generally two candidate routing choices at each intersection.
Such an action space will streamline the learning difficulty of
the DRL agent and promote its exploration and improvement.
3) Reward Function R: Reward rt is the feedback from the
environment after the vehicle executes the action at . It aims to
guide the DRL agent to learn the desired routing performance
and plays a crucial role in the learning of the DRL agent [55].
For the network-wide traffic, the reward function R is dedicated
to guiding the agent to learn a routing policy that is beneficial to
both the microscopic individual vehicles and the macroscopic
traffic system. However, to accurately evaluate the benefits of a
routing decision with the reward function R, the following two
characteristics need to be emphasized.
First, it is challenging to simultaneously evaluate the benefits
of a route decision for individual vehicles and the traffic system.
A key reason is that the benefits for individual vehicles are
reflected at the microscopic level, while the benefits for the traffic
system are reflected at the macroscopic level. To evaluate the
benefits of routing decision at both the microscopic and macroscopic levels, an in-between performance metric is needed.
Inspired by our previous work [16], we found that the MFD [44],
[45] of the network-wide traffic can effectively evaluate the
macroscopic performance differences caused by the microscopic
self-organized behaviors of vehicles. More essentially, it is the
vehicle accumulation in the road network that can capture the
aggregation characteristics in the macroscopic traffic system
caused by the microscopic self-organized behaviors of vehicles.
The vehicle accumulation will directly affect the travel efficiency
of the ego vehicle and will affect the efficiency of other vehicles.
Therefore, we use the metric of vehicle accumulation to design
our reward function.
Second, the reward function should be based on locally accessible traffic information to make a relative, rather than an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

absolute, evaluation of the benefits of routing decisions. There
are two reasons for this. On the one hand, since our routing model
is decentralized and designed to be deployed on-board units,
the reward function should be based on locally accessible traffic
information, similar to the observation space. On the other hand,
we desire that the agent can make the relatively optimal routing
decision from candidate routes under any traffic conditions. That
is, whether in a smooth or congested network-wide traffic, the
reward function should be able to make a positive feedback
evaluation as long as the agent chooses a better route among
candidate routes. According to the above characteristics, the
backpressure (BP ) principle in the wireless communication
field can effectively deal with this challenge. Backpressure
principle is a simple but flexible idea used to solve the transmission lines scheduling problem in wireless communication
networks [42], [43]. Its core idea is to define an evaluation
function to make a relative evaluation of the occupancy level
of different transmission lines, and then usually choose the
idler line to transmit data. This is consistent with the desired
performance of our routing model. Therefore, we will use the
backpressure principle to design our reward function.
Based on the above considerations, our reward function is
designed as follows. First, we define the backpressure function
according to the accumulation of vehicles on the candidate lanes:
⎞α
⎛
ρLanej
⎠
(6)
BPj = 1 − ⎝
max
ρLanei
i∈{Candidate lanes}

where BPj is the backpressure value of Lane j. ρLanej is the
density of vehicles on Lane j. α determines the relative discrimination of the backpressure value. Therefore, the backpressure
value of the candidate lane with the greatest vehicle density is
0, and the backpressure value of the rest candidate lanes is a
positive value less than 1. The smaller the density is, the greater
the backpressure value is.
According to the our routing principle of “Consider two steps,
take one step”, we define the following one-step reward term
Rone−step and two-step reward term Rtwo−step , respectively:
Rone-step = 

eBPChosen lane
i∈{Candidate lanes}

eBP i

eBPSubsequent lane of chosen lane
Rtwo-step = 
BP i
i∈{Subsequent lanes} e

(7)
(8)

Therefore, the reward function R is defined as follows using a
linear combination manner:
R = w1 ∗ Rone-step + w2 ∗ Rtwo-step

(9)

where w1 and w2 are weight coefficients, which are used to
adjust the trade-off between one-step and two-step benefits.
Here, it should be illustrated that the feedback delay of the
reward function is mainly in calculating the backpressure value
corresponding to action at . It can only be obtained after the
ego vehicle executes action at , i.e., when the vehicle driving
through the corresponding chosen route, it can be calculated.
Although it will cause a serious delay in our reward function,

1249

Fig. 4. Illustration of the training pipeline of the upper-level multi-agent DRL
based routing model. J(ϕi ) is the loss function for the value network and Jπ (θ)
is the loss function for the policy network πθ . See Appendix Algorithm 1 for
details.

it can accurately evaluate the impact of the individual vehicles
routing decision on the traffic system.
C. Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
In this article, we aim to enable the DRL agent to learn
a routing policy that can promote efficient collaboration between vehicles regarding limited road resources. To this end,
we modify the outstanding reinforcement learning algorithm,
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [56] to train our agent. Compared with
other DRL algorithms, SAC significantly improves the learning
efficiency by introducing entropy regularization and achieves
state-of-the-art performance on many problems [48], [57], [58].
However, the original SAC algorithm is oriented to single-agent
problems with continuous action space. Here, the formulated
routing decision problem is a multi-agent problem with discrete
action space. Therefore, the original SAC algorithm needs to
be modified accordingly. The modified SAC is illustrated in
Appendix Algorithm 1 and the details can be found in [48], [59].
The training process of the routing model alternates between
experience collecting and policy updating. Specifically, we share
policy between vehicles during training, and each vehicle counts
its observation ot independently and makes routing decision
at based on the shared policy πθ . All the experiences will be
collected into the experience memory pool and used to train the
DRL model, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
Moreover, both the policy network πθ and value networks
consist of deep neural networks. The input to the policy network
is the observation ot , while the output is a probability distribution
over the actions. The DRL agent will choose the action at
with the highest probability for the vehicle to execute. The
architecture of the policy network πθ is illustrated in Fig. 4,
where we use a fully connected deep neural network to learn
the mapping from observation ot to action at , and the last layer
uses the softmax activation function to output the probability
distribution. The value network has a similar architecture to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 5. Illustration of the proposed adaptive cooperative driving for CAVs at intersections. (left) Queuing length information in the view zone (obtained by the
roadside units at the current intersection) and drive-in traffic flow rate information of each lane (obtained by roadside units at the adjacent intersections and V2X
communication) will be used to solve for the passing order of vehicles within the control zone (indicated by the blue dashed line). (right) An illustration of the
passing order. For example, “BDEFCA” is a feasible passing order. When the routes of two vehicles conflict, the more front the vehicle is in the passing order, the
higher its priority is. For example, the priority of Vehicle D is higher than the priority of Vehicle A.

the policy network, except that the last layer directly outputs
the value of each action instead of the probability distribution
over the actions. The policy network and value network will be
updated separately and their parameters are not shared [60].
IV. ADAPTIVE COOPERATIVE DRIVING AT INTERSECTIONS
In this section, we present the lower-level adaptive cooperative
driving algorithm at microscopic intersections in detail.
Followed by the problem context analyzed in Section II-B,
the core idea of the adaptive cooperative driving algorithm is
to adaptively adjust the right-of-way assignment of vehicles
passing through the intersection based on the traffic states,
expecting that vehicles on the lanes with longer queue lengths
and greater traffic flow rates can have priority in passing the
intersection, so as to promote the efficiency and stability of the
traffic system at the network-wide level. To this end, the core of
our adaptive cooperative driving algorithm has two sequential
steps. In the first step, we define a lane priority based on the
vehicle queuing information and the traffic flow rates, which can
adaptively determine the priority of lanes in different directions
at the intersection. In the second step, the priorities of lanes will
be used to guide the search process of the Monte Carlo tree
search (MCTS) based algorithm to find the desired right-of-way
assignment solution, i.e., the passing order, as illustrated in
Fig. 5.
In the following, Section IV-A presents the lane prioritization of adaptive cooperative driving. Section IV-B presents the
MCTS based adaptive cooperative driving algorithm.
A. Lane Prioritization of Adaptive Cooperative Driving
We formulate the priority of lanes according to the above
ideas. In order to broaden the traffic state information input to
the intersection system on both spatial and temporal dimensions,

the lane prioritization will be composed of two parts. First, in
the spatial domain, we define the priority of the lanes based on
the number of vehicles in the view zone. Intuitively, promoting
vehicles on lanes with more vehicles to pass the intersection
faster will effectively prevent vehicles on corresponding lanes
from queuing outside the control zone for a long-time waiting.
of Lane i is defined as:
Therefore, the spatial priority P rspatial
i
P rispatial =

Niview
max Njview

(10)

j

where Njview is the number of vehicles in Lane j within the view
zone.
Second, in the temporal domain, we define the priority of
the lanes based on the drive-in traffic flow rate on each lane.
Intuitively, allowing vehicles on lanes with a higher drive-in
flow rate to pass earlier will reserve the right-of-way for subsequent arriving vehicles in advance, avoiding them long-time
waiting outside the control zone. Therefore, the temporal priority
of Lane i is defined as:
P rtemporal
i
P ritemporal =

fi
max fj

(11)

j

where fi is the drive-in flow rate of Lane i. Here, it should
be illustrated that in the CAV environment, the drive-in flow
rate can be obtained from the roadside devices at adjacent
intersections via V2X, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Since the real-time
driven-in traffic flow will arrive at the control zone of the current
intersection sometime later, the upstream driven-in flow rate
essentially contains information about the future state of the
intersection system. Therefore, considering the temporal priority
determined by the drive-in flow rate is essentially
P rtemporal
i
incorporating the information about the future state of the current
intersection system. Meanwhile, this will promote the fairness

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

1251

Fig. 6. Illustration of the adaptive MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm. The lane priority is used to guide the tree search process. MCTS algorithm: (i)
Selection: selecting the most promising nodes based on their scores; (ii) Expansion: expanding the not-yet-visited child node into the current search tree; (iii)
Simulation: running several rollout simulations until a leaf node is reached, i.e., a complete passing order is obtained; (iv) Backup: back-propagating to update the
scores of all parent nodes based on the score of the leaf node.

of the cooperative divining algorithm for vehicles’ efficiency.
Finally, the total priority of Lane i is defined as:
P ri = wP r ∗ P rispatial + (1 − wP r ) ∗ P ritemporal

(12)

where wP r ∈ (0, 1) is a weight coefficient. In the following, the
lane priorities will be used to solve the passing order.
B. MCTS Based Adaptive Cooperative Driving
This subsection shows how to use the lane priorities defined above to improve the cooperative driving algorithm at
microscopic intersections to better deal with the network-wide
traffic. Our core idea is that cooperative driving algorithm
at intersections should aim not only to reduce the delay of
vehicles in the control zone passing through the intersection,
but also to allow vehicles in lanes with longer queue lengths
and greater traffic flow rates to have priority through the intersection, the latter of which is never considered by existing
algorithms.
Here, we take the MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm at isolated intersections as the basic algorithm because it
achieves the highest efficiency in the performance comparison
at the signal-free intersection [18], [32], [61]. The MCTS based
cooperative driving algorithm formulates the right-of-way assignment problem as a special tree search problem, and then uses
the MCTS algorithm to search the tree with the delay of vehicles
in the control zone as the objective function. However, due to the
strong real-time constraints, it is impossible to traverse the whole
search tree in a limited time budget. Therefore, the core idea of
the MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm is to guide the
search process of the MCTS approach by designing the heuristic
rules to traverse more potential nodes in a limited time. More
details about the MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm can

be found in our previous article [9], [26]. In the following, we
present the improved MCTS based adaptive cooperative driving
algorithm.
The iterative search process of the MCTS approach has four
main steps: selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation, as illustrated in Fig. 6. In order to enable vehicles in
the lanes with higher priorities to join the passing order earlier
(accordingly, these vehicles will have priority in passing through
the intersection), we make the following improvements in the
selection and simulation steps.
1) Improved Selection: The original node selection method
is based on the classical UCB1 policy [62]. The UCB1 policy
calculates the node’s score based on the cumulative visit times
and node value, and then selects the child node with the highest
score as the expanded node, as follows:

ln T
(13)
arg max Qk + λ
k
Tk
where Qk is the value of child node k determined by its objective
value, T is the cumulative visit times of the current node,
and Tk is the visit times of child node k. λ is the weight
parameter.
In order to enable vehicles in the lanes with higher priorities
to join the passing order earlier, we modify the original UCB1
policy by adding an item related to the priority of the lane where
the vehicle is located, so as to improve the scores of vehicles on
the lanes with higher priorities. The improved UCB1 policy is
as follows:

ln T
+ ηP r(k)
(14)
arg max Qk + λ
k
Tk
where P r(k) is the priority value of the lane where the vehicle
is located. η is a parameter used to weigh the importance of lane

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

priorities. The modified UCB1 policy has three items, 
of which

the first item Qk is for exploration, the second item lnTkT is
for exploitation, and the third item P r(k) is for giving priority
to vehicles on the high-priority lanes.
2) Improved Simulation: Simulation is used to determine a
complete passing order by continuously expanding the partial
passing order represented by the current node. In the original
MCTS based algorithm, the simulation step randomly selects
lanes and then expands vehicles closer to the conflict zone. The
priorities of lanes are not considered when randomly selecting
lanes. To enable vehicles in the lanes with higher priorities to
join the passing order earlier, we design the following lane selection probability according to the priorities of the lanes defined
above:
pi = 

eP ri
i∈{All lanes}

eP rj

(15)

In the simulation step, lanes are selected based on the probability
rather than the original random selection. In this way, vehicles
on the high-priority lanes will be expanded into the passing order
with higher probability.
The expansion and backpropagation steps are the same as in
the original MCTS based algorithm [26]. Here, it is noteworthy
that when the numbers of queuing vehicles and drive-in flow
rates of the different lanes are equal, the priorities of corresponding lanes will be equal and the adaptive MCTS based
algorithm will be the same as the original MCTS based algorithm. However, in most cases, the numbers of queuing vehicles
and the drive-in flow rates are different for different lanes (for
example, the common traffic tidal flow phenomenon caused by
commuting). At this time, the priority defined above will be
changed adaptively, so that the adaptive MCTS based algorithm
can adaptively adjust the passing order according to the lane
priority, promoting vehicles in the lanes with higher flow and
a greater number of queuing vehicles to pass the intersection
earlier. Moreover, if there is no computation time limit imposed,
the time complexity of the adaptive MCTS algorithm is O(2n ),
where n is the number of vehicles. To meet real-time requirements, we set the maximum computation time budget to 100 ms.
Finally, it should be illustrated that the objective function value
of the passing order, i.e., the delay, can be conveniently derived
using the Passing Ordre to Trajectory Interpretation Algorithm
proposed in [26] with an algorithmic complexity of O(n), where
n is the number of vehicles. For interested readers, please refer
to [26] for more details.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In order to verify the performance of the proposed bi-level
network-wide cooperative driving approach, we conduct numerical experiments from several aspects. Section V-A describes
our experimental settings and the road network case considered.
Section V-B presents the results of the performance evaluation.
Section V-C analyzes the upper-level multi-agent DRL based
routing model and Section V-D analyzes the lower-level adaptive
cooperative driving algorithm at signal-free intersections.

Fig. 7.

Typical network-wide traffic environment with nine intersections.

A. Numerical Experiment Settings
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to evalaute
the performance of the network-wide cooperative driving approach proposed in this article. Here, we use CAVSim [32], [61]
simulation platform to carry out experiments systematically.
CAVSim is a microscopic traffic simulator for CAVs, which
emphasizes the impact of the CAVs’ microscopic driving behavior on the macroscopic traffic system. Moreover, microscopic
traffic simulation can enhance the properties capture of the
realistic traffic setup and the vehicles’ driving behaviors under
the proposed methods, and thus enable a more comprehensive
evaluation of the proposed methods. Without losing generality,
we build a typical network-wide traffic environment as illustrated in Fig. 7, where L1 is the distance from the intersection to
the boundary of the road network and L2 is the distance between
intersections. The origin-destination (OD) is set to randomly
select a destination for each vehicle in the direction different
from that of the origin.
Table I lists the parameter settings in the simulation experiments. The arriving vehicles meet the Poisson distribution and
continuously drive into the simulated road network from the
boundary of the network. When not specified, the arrival rates in
different directions are equal. For DRL agent training, the learning rates for the policy network and value network are 0.0001.
The size of experience memory pool is 5000. Batch size for
training is 128. The discount factor for DRL agent learning is 0.5.
The interpolation factor in Polyak averaging for target network
updating is 0.01. The architecture of the used fully connected
deep neural network is (32 − 256 − 1024 − 512 − 64 − 2).
In the following, we will first evaluate the performance of the
network-wide cooperative driving approach in Section V-B. In
Section V-C, we will demonstrate the training and performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

1253

Fig. 8. Travel time of vehicles under different arrival rates. For comparison, we count the travel time on the routes with a length of 2400 m, i.e., the vehicles
crossing the road network diagonally (similarly hereinafter).

TABLE I
PARAMETER SETTINGS

of the upper-level multi-agent DRL based routing model. Section V-D will evaluate the performance of the lower-level adaptive cooperative driving algorithm at the network-wide traffic.
B. Performance Evaluation of the Network-Wide Approach
Here, we verify the performance of the bi-level network-wide
cooperative driving approach proposed in this article via comparative experiments. We systematically compare our approach
with a benchmark approach. The benchmark approach consists
of the Dijkstra based shortest routing at the upper level and the
state-of-the-art MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm [26]
at the lower level.
Under different traffic demands, we count the following performance metrics:
r Travel time: Travel time is a performance metric of the
network-wide cooperative driving approach at the individual vehicles’ level. Generally, a better approach can achieve
shorter travel time and smaller variations in travel times
between vehicles, i.e., better fairness [18], [32].
r Accumulation of vehicles: Vehicle accumulation is a performance metric of the network-wide cooperative driving
approach at the macroscopic system level. Generally, a

better approach can maintain lower vehicle accumulation
at the same arrival rate.
r Macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD): The MFD provides a comprehensive view of the approach’s performance
under different traffic conditions and is a powerful tool
for evaluating the impact of the vehicle’s microscopic
driving behavior on the macroscopic network-wide traffic
system [16], [63].
We simulate the network-wide traffic under different arrival
rates for 30 mins and count the following performance results.
1) Travel Time: First, we count the travel time of vehicles
on routes with equal length under different arrival rates, and the
results are shown in Fig. 8. The results show that when the arrival
rate is low (e.g., 300 veh/(h ∗ lane)), the performance of the
two approaches is similar due to the small number of vehicles
and smooth network-wide traffic. However, as the arrival rate
increases, the travel time of the benchmark approach increases
significantly. Meanwhile, the travel time of different vehicles
varies greatly. On the contrary, under the proposed approach, the
travel time of vehicles maintains at a low level as the increase
of arrival rate, and meanwhile, the difference in travel time of
different vehicles is small. It suggests that the network-wide
cooperative driving approach proposed in this article reduces the
travel time of vehicles and improves the efficiency of the overall
network-wide traffic system. Moreover, the proposed approach
achieves better fairness, and the travel time variance of different
vehicles is small.
2) Accumulation of Vehicles: Second, we count the accumulation of vehicles in the road network under different arrival
rates, and the results are shown in Fig. 9. The results show that
under almost all arrival rates, the proposed approach achieves
lower vehicle accumulation. It suggests that under the proposed
approach, vehicles can pass through the road network more
efficiently so that the vehicle accumulation in the road network
is kept at a low situation.
Moreover, with the increase of the arrival rates, under the
proposed approach, the increase rate of vehicle accumulation is
smaller than that of the benchmark approach. Especially when
the arrival rate is 360 veh/(h ∗ lane), the road network loses

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1254

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Accumulation of vehicles in the road network under different arrival rates.

Fig. 11. Simulation snapshots under different approaches. The light gray is
the view zone and the dark gray is the control zone. (a) Benchmark approach;
(b) Proposed approach.
Fig. 10.

MFDs of the network-wide traffic under different approaches.

balance soon under the benchmark approach, i.e., the output flow
is smaller than the input flow and vehicle accumulation continues
to increase. On the contrary, under the proposed approach, the
network-wide traffic system still operates smoothly.
3) Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD): Third, we
count the MFDs of the network-wide traffic under the two
approaches by varying the arrival rate, and the results are shown
in Fig. 10. The MFD results show that the difference between the
two approaches is not significant at lower vehicle accumulation.
However, as the number of vehicles increases, the approach
proposed in this article can achieve greater traffic flow, which
significantly improves the efficiency of the traffic system. Moreover, the MFD’s critical density of the road network increases
under our approach, suggesting that the methods in this article
increase the carrying capacity of the road network.
4) Further Look Into the Proposed Approach: Here, we visually show how the proposed network-wide cooperative driving
approach contributes to the performance. For this purpose, we
intercept snapshots of the simulation at the same moment with
the same arrival rate under different approaches, as shown in
Fig. 11. The results show that under the proposed approach,
the distribution of vehicles within the road network is relatively
uniform and dispersed. Meanwhile, at microscopic intersections,

the number of vehicles in different directions is basically uniform, and there is no queuing congestion. On the contrary, under
the benchmark approach, the distribution of vehicles within
the road network is uneven. The number of vehicles at the
intersection varies greatly in different directions, and congested
queues occur in some directions, especially causing vehicles to
queue beyond the control zone.
C. Analysis of the Upper-Level Multi-Agent DRL Based
Routing Model
The observation space and reward function play an important
influence on the training of multi-agent DRL based routing
model. Here, we verify the performance of the proposed observation space and reward function by training and testing the
corresponding models, respectively. In addition, under the same
lower-level adaptive cooperative driving algorithm, we compare
the upper-level DRL based routing method with the Dijkstra
based shortest routing method.
1) Observation Information: Here, we explore the impact of
the two types of observation information proposed in Section III-B on the routing model. Fig. 12 shows the variation curves of
the reward values with the learning steps for different observation information settings. The results show that the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

1255

Fig. 12. Effects of different observation information on training, where the
solid lines are the moving average value. Model without one-step observation
ΩO means that we set the value of ΩO to 0 to mask the corresponding observation
information, and the others are similar.
Fig. 14. Improvement rate of the adaptive cooperative driving algorithm with
different parameter settings.

Fig. 13. Average travel time under the DRL based routing method and the
Dijkstra based routing method.

model achieves higher and more stable reward value curves
under our observation space setting. Models without one-step
observation ΩO or two-step observation ΩT show significant
degradation in performance. In particular, the results show that
one-step observation ΩO plays a more dominant influence, while
two-step observation ΩT makes an important contribution to
achieving a higher reward. Therefore, the two types of observation information proposed in this article contribute significantly
to the performance of the routing model.
2) Reward Function: To verify the superiority of the backpressure based reward function proposed in this article, we
compare it with the reward function based on travel time. The
travel time based reward is a direct and absolute performance
evaluation of the route decision. Here, we use the above two
different reward functions to train the routing models in the same
simulation environment, where the arrival rate of vehicles during
training is 400 veh/(lane ∗ h). For the well-trained models, we
test them under different arrival rates, and the results are shown
in Table II.
The results show that the backpressure based reward function leads to better performance of the multi-agent DRL based
routing model, especially better generalization performance.
When the test environment is inconsistent with the training

Fig. 15. Performance of adaptive MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm
compared with the original MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm. (a)
Average travel time under different arrival rates; (b) Travel time distribution under different cooperative driving algorithms, where the arrival rate is
550 veh/(lane ∗ h).

environment, our model achieves better performance. One of
the key reasons is that the backpressure based reward function
is to make a relative evaluation of route decisions. Whether in
smooth or congested traffic, it will be actively rewarded if the
model chooses a better route. On the contrary, travel time varies
greatly in smooth and congested traffic, so the reward function
based on travel time cannot accurately reflect the performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 16. Passing order solved by different algorithms for the same scenario. The number next to the vehicle is the index of the corresponding vehicle in the
solved passing order. The smaller the number, the higher the ranking, i.e., the higher the priority. (left) Original MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm; (right)
Adaptive MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm proposed in this article.

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF ROUTING MODELS TRAINED WITH DIFFERENT
REWARD FUNCTIONS

caused by the routing decision. Therefore, the results suggest
that the backpressure based reward function proposed in this
article is conducive to learning the desired performance of the
multi-agent DRL based routing model, especially the excellent
generalization performance.
3) Performance Comparison: Here, we compare the upperlevel DRL based routing method with the Dijkstra based shortest
routing method. With the same lower-level adaptive cooperative
driving algorithm and traffic demands, we deploy the DRL
based routing method and the Dijkstra based routing method
respectively, and count the travel time of vehicles on the same
routes. The results are shown in Fig. 13. The results show that
compared to the Dijkstra based routing method, the proposed
DRL based routing method can achieve shorter travel times
under different arrival rates. As the arrival rate increases, the
performance benefits of the proposed DRL based routing method
become more significant, and the travel time increases slowly.
On the contrary, the travel time under the Dijkstra based routing
method significantly increases as the arrival rate increases.

D. Analysis of the Lower-Level Adaptive Cooperative Driving
1) Parameter Analysis: As presented in Section IV, wP r
and η play a crucial role in the proposed adaptive cooperative
driving algorithm, where wP r is used to weigh the spatial domain
priority against the temporal domain priority and η determines
the extent to which the search process considers lane priority.
To determine the optimal parameter settings for the proposed
adaptive cooperative driving algorithm, we test the performance
by varying wP r and η. Here, we take the travel time T travel for the
vehicles to pass through the road network as the performance
metric. We compare the proposed algorithm with the original
MCTS based cooperative driving algorithm by defining the
following travel time reduction ratio:
δ=

travel
travel
− TAdaptive
TMCTS
MCTS
∗ 100%
travel
TMCTS

(16)

travel
where TMCTS
is the travel time under the original MCTS based
travel
algorithm and TAdaptive
MCTS is the travel time under the adaptive
MCTS based algorithm proposed in this article.
As shown in Fig. 14, we obtain the performance improvement
results by varying wP r and η from 0 to 1. The results show
that the adaptive cooperative driving algorithm has significant
performance improvement and shortens the average travel time
of vehicles for most cases of the parameter settings. Among
them, the highest performance improvement with δ = 8.92% is
achieved when wP r is 0.8 and η is 0.4. Thus, such a combination
of parameters is used for the other experiments in this article.
Moreover, the results also show that performance degrades when
wP r is set large (e.g., wP r = 1) and η is set small (e.g., η = 0.0).
The reason for this is that the upstream drive-in flow of the
lanes (essentially, the future state of the intersection) is overly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

considered, while the current state of the intersection is ignored,
resulting in performance degradation. Therefore, a balanced
consideration of the current and future states of the intersection
is critical to the performance of the traffic system.
2) Performance Comparison: Here, we compare the adaptive MCTS based algorithm proposed in this article with the
original MCTS based algorithm to verify its performance superiority. With the same upper-level routing model and traffic
demands, we deploy the original algorithm and the adaptive
algorithm respectively, and count the travel time of vehicles on
the same routes. The results are shown in Fig. 15. The average
travel time results (Fig. 15(a)) show that the vehicles achieve a
shorter average travel time under our adaptive cooperative driving algorithm. Meanwhile, the benefits of the proposed adaptive
algorithm become more significant as the arrival rate increases.
Fig. 15(b) shows the distribution of travel time. The results show
that the adaptive algorithm shifts the distribution of travel time
to the left, especially avoiding the problem that some vehicles
have excessive travel time. Thus, the results suggest that the
adaptive cooperative driving algorithm significantly improves
the performance of cooperative driving within the network-wide
traffic in terms of efficiency and fairness by considering the
priority of lanes in the spatial and temporal domains.
3) Further Look Into the Effect of Adaptive Cooperative
Driving: Here, we use a specific scenario to further look into
how adaptive lane prioritization improves the performance of
cooperative driving in network-wide traffic. We solve the passing
order for the same scenario with different cooperative driving
algorithms, as shown in Fig. 16. In the scenario, the number
of vehicles on the south-to-north lane is significantly greater
than in the other directions. The original MCTS based algorithm
does not consider the queuing and traffic flow rate in different
directions, but only considers the real-time state information
of the vehicles in the control zone. As a result, vehicles in the
south-to-north lanes have a lower priority in the derived passing
order, while vehicles in the lanes with fewer vehicles have a
higher priority. In contrast, the adaptive cooperative driving
algorithm proposed in this article derives a passing order with
higher priority for vehicles in the south-to-north lane. The results
show that the adaptive algorithm adaptively increases the priority
of lanes with more vehicles by taking into account the number
of vehicles with a wider spatio-temporal range and the drive-in
traffic flow rate information, thus assigning higher priority to the
vehicles in the corresponding lanes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, a novel bi-level network-wide cooperative
driving approach is proposed to boost the traffic efficiency for
network-wide CAVs. In the upper level, we address the dynamic
routing problem and propose a multi-agent DRL based routing
model. We design the observation space and reward function
based on the proposed routing principle of “Consider two steps,
take one step,” which promotes the DRL agent to learn a dynamic
routing policy that can consider the performance of individual
vehicles and global traffic system. In the lower level, we resolve
the cooperative driving at microscopic intersections and propose

1257

Algorithm 1: Multi-Agent SAC With Discrete Action for
the Routing Problem.

an adaptive cooperative driving algorithm by introducing lane
prioritization, which effectively solves the deficiencies encountered by existing intersection cooperative driving algorithms.
The simulation experiments show that the upper and lower levels
complement each other and work together to boost the efficiency
of the overall macroscopic traffic system via the mesoscopic and
microscopic driving behaviors of individual vehicles. More generally, the bi-level network-wide cooperative driving approach
provides a general solving roadmap and corresponding methods
for collaborating network-wide CAV swarms, effectively promoting the utilization of right-of-way resources and boosting
network-wide traffic efficiency.

APPENDIX A
SAC ALGORITHM FOR ROUTING
See Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

REFERENCES
[1] F.-Y. Wang, “Metavehicles in the metaverse: Moving to a new phase for
intelligent vehicles and smart mobility,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 1–5, Mar. 2022.
[2] D. Cao et al., “Future directions of intelligent vehicles: Potentials, possibilities, and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 7–10,
Mar. 2022.
[3] Z. Ju, H. Zhang, X. Li, X. Chen, J. Han, and M. Yang, “A survey on
attack detection and resilience for connected and automated vehicles: From
vehicle dynamics and control perspective,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 815–837, Dec. 2022.
[4] S. Xiao, X. Ge, Q.-L. Han, and Y. Zhang, “Resource-efficient platooning
control of connected automated vehicles over VANETs,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 579–589, Sep. 2022.
[5] C. Chang et al., “Bev-V2X: Cooperative birds-eye-view fusion and grid
occupancy prediction via V2X-based data sharing,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., early access, Jul. 11, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3293954.
[6] D. Liu, S. Baldi, V. Jain, W. Yu, and P. Frasca, “Cyclic communication
in adaptive strategies to platooning: The case of synchronized merging,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 490–500, Sep. 2021.
[7] H. Yu et al., “Automated vehicle-involved traffic flow studies: A survey of
assumptions, models, speculations, and perspectives,” Transp. Res. Part
C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 127, 2021, Art. no. 103101.
[8] L. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, and F.-Y. Wang, “Simulation driven AI: From
artificial to actual and vice versa,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 38, no. 1,
pp. 3–8, 2023.
[9] J. Zhang, S. Li, and L. Li, “Coordinating CAV swarms at intersections
with a deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 6, pp. 6280–6291, Jun. 2023.
[10] R. van Hoek, J. Ploeg, and H. Nijmeijer, “Cooperative driving of automated
vehicles using b-splines for trajectory planning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 594–604, Sep. 2021.
[11] Z. Zhu, N. Pivaro, S. Gupta, A. Gupta, and M. Canova, “Safe modelbased off-policy reinforcement learning for ECO-driving in connected and
automated hybrid electric vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 387–398, Jun. 2022.
[12] Z. Hu, S. Lou, Y. Xing, X. Wang, D. Cao, and C. Lv, “Review and perspectives on driver digital twin and its enabling technologies for intelligent
vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 417–440, Sep. 2022.
[13] H. Yu, C. Chang, S. Li, and L. Li, “CD-DB: A data storage model for
cooperative driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 492–501,
Jan. 2023.
[14] N. Williams, G. Wu, and M. Barth, “Position uncertainty-tolerant cooperative merging application for mixed multilane traffic,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 143–153, Mar. 2022.
[15] J. Ge, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Yao, Z. Zhang, and R. Zhou, “Autonomous
vehicles testing considering utility-based operable tasks,” Tsinghua Sci.
Technol., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 965–975, 2023.
[16] J. Zhang, H. Pei, X. J. Ban, and L. Li, “Analysis of cooperative driving
strategies at road network level with macroscopic fundamental diagram,”
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 135, 2022, Art. no. 103503.
[17] L. Li, D. Wen, and D. Yao, “A survey of traffic control with vehicular communications,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 425–432,
Feb. 2014.
[18] H. Xu, C. G. Cassandras, L. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Comparison of cooperative
driving strategies for CAVs at signal-free intersections,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7614–7627, Jul. 2022.
[19] L. Li and S. Li, “A theoretical analysis for cooperative driving at idealized non-signalized intersections,” Social Sci. Electron. Publishing, to be
published, doi: 10.2139/ssrn.4010332.
[20] C. Chang, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Li, and L. Li, “Driving safety monitoring
and warning for connected and automated vehicles via edge computing,”
in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2022, pp. 3940–3947.
[21] J. Ge, H. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Yao, and L. Li, “Heterogeneous driver
modeling and corner scenarios sampling for automated vehicles testing,”
J. Adv. Transp., vol. 2022, pp. 1–14, 2022.
[22] C. Zhao, L. Li, X. Pei, Z. Li, F.-Y. Wang, and X. Wu, “A comparative study
of state-of-the-art driving strategies for autonomous vehicles,” Accident
Anal. Prevention, vol. 150, 2021, Art. no. 105937.
[23] K. Dresner and P. Stone, “A multiagent approach to autonomous intersection management,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 31, pp. 591–656, 2008.
[24] Y. Zhang and C. G. Cassandras, “A decentralized optimal control
framework for connected automated vehicles at urban intersections with
dynamic resequencing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decis. Control., 2018,
pp. 217–222.

[25] L. Li and F.-Y. Wang, “Cooperative driving at blind crossings using
intervehicle communication,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 55, no. 6,
pp. 1712–1724, Nov. 2006.
[26] H. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Li, and W. Li, “Cooperative driving at unsignalized
intersections using tree search,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21,
no. 11, pp. 4563–4571, Nov. 2020.
[27] L. Li and F.-Y. Wang, “Cooperative driving at adjacent blind intersections,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man Cybern., 2005, vol. 1, pp. 847–852.
[28] F. Yan, M. Dridi, and A. E. Moudni, “A scheduling approach for autonomous vehicle sequencing problem at multi-intersections,” Int. J. Prod.
Res., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 57–68, 2011.
[29] A. Giridhar and P. R. Kumar, “Scheduling automated traffic on a network
of roads,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1467–1474,
Sep. 2006.
[30] H. Pei, Y. Zhang, Q. Tao, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Distributed cooperative
driving in multi-intersection road networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5390–5403, Jun. 2021.
[31] Q. Guo, L. Li, and X. J. Ban, “Urban traffic signal control with connected
and automated vehicles: A survey,” Trans. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol.,
vol. 101, pp. 313–334, 2019.
[32] J. Zhang et al., “CAVSim: A microscopic traffic simulator for evaluation
of connected and automated vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
early access, May 12, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2023.3273565.
[33] Y. Ma, C. Sun, J. Chen, D. Cao, and L. Xiong, “Verification and validation methods for decision-making and planning of automated vehicles: A review,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 480–498,
Sep. 2022.
[34] S. Feng, Z. Song, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, and L. Li, “Robust platoon control in
mixed traffic flow based on tube model predictive control,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Veh., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 711–722, Dec. 2021.
[35] H. Chen and C. Lv, “Online learning-informed feedforward-feedback
controller synthesis for path tracking of autonomous vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2759–2769, Apr. 2023.
[36] M. Papageorgiou and A. Kotsialos, “Freeway ramp metering: An
overview,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 271–281,
Dec. 2002.
[37] B. G. Heydecker, “Objectives, stimulus and feedback in signal control of
road traffic,” J. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 63–76, 2004.
[38] M. Papageorgiou, E. Kosmatopoulos, I. Papamichail, and Y. Wang, “A
misapplication of the local ramp metering strategy ALINEA,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 360–365, Jun. 2008.
[39] Z. Li, L. Elefteriadou, and S. Ranka, “Signal control optimization for
automated vehicles at isolated signalized intersections,” Transp. Res. Part
C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 49, pp. 1–18, 2014.
[40] W. Liu, Z. Li, L. Li, and F.-Y. Wang, “Parking like a human: A direct
trajectory planning solution,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 18,
no. 12, pp. 3388–3397, Dec. 2017.
[41] F. Tian, Z. Li, F.-Y. Wang, and L. Li, “Parallel learning-based steering
control for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 379–389, Jan. 2023.
[42] L. Tassiulas and A. Ephremides, “Stability properties of constrained
queueing systems and scheduling policies for maximum throughput in
multihop radio networks,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Conf. Decis. Control, 1990,
pp. 2130–2132.
[43] M. J. Neely and R. Urgaonkar, “Optimal backpressure routing for wireless
networks with multi-receiver diversity,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 7, no. 5,
pp. 862–881, 2009.
[44] C. F. Daganzo and N. Geroliminis, “An analytical approximation for the
macroscopic fundamental diagram of urban traffic,” Transp. Res. Part B:
Methodological, vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 771–781, 2008.
[45] N. Geroliminis and C. F. Daganzo, “Existence of urban-scale macroscopic
fundamental diagrams: Some experimental findings,” Transp. Res. Part B:
Methodological, vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 759–770, 2008.
[46] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[47] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[48] J. Zhang, C. Chang, X. Zeng, and L. Li, “Multi-agent DRL-based lane
change with right-of-way collaboration awareness,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 854–869, Jan. 2023.
[49] J. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Li, Y. Li, and H. Dong, “A bi-level cooperative operation
approach for AGV based automated valet parking,” Transp. Res. Part C:
Emerg. Technol., vol. 128, 2021, Art. no. 103140.
[50] Z. Peng, Q. Li, K. M. Hui, C. Liu, and B. Zhou, “Learning to simulate
self-driven particles system with coordinated policy optimization,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 10784–10797.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: BI-LEVEL NETWORK-WIDE COOPERATIVE DRIVING APPROACH INCLUDING DRL-BASED ROUTING

[51] Q. Liu et al., “Fault-tolerant cooperative driving at highway on-ramps
considering communication failure,” Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol.,
vol. 153, 2023, Art. no. 104227.
[52] H. Pei, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pei, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Fault-tolerant
cooperative driving at signal-free intersections,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2023.
[53] H.-R. Lee and T. Lee, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm to
solve a partially-observable multi-agent problem in disaster response,”
Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 291, no. 1, pp. 296–308, 2021.
[54] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized
POMDPs. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2016.
[55] R. Devidze, G. Radanovic, P. Kamalaruban, and A. Singla, “Explicable
reward design for reinforcement learning agents,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 20118–20131.
[56] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Offpolicy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[57] X. Wang et al., “Deep reinforcement learning: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Sep. 28, 2022,
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3207346.
[58] F. Mao, Z. Li, and L. Li, “A comparison of deep reinforcement learning
models for isolated traffic signal control,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag.,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 160–180, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[59] P. Christodoulou, “Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings,” 2019,
arXiv:1910.07207.
[60] P. Long, T. Fan, X. Liao, W. Liu, H. Zhang, and J. Pan, “Towards optimally
decentralized multi-robot collision avoidance via deep reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2018, pp. 6252–6259.
[61] J. Zhang et al., “CAVSim: A microscope traffic simulator for connected
and automated vehicles environment,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst., 2022, pp. 3719–3724.
[62] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári, “Bandit based monte-carlo planning,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 282–293.
[63] C. F. Daganzo, L. J. Lehe, and J. Argote-Cabanero, “Adaptive offsets
for signalized streets,” Transp. Res. Part B: Methodological, vol. 117,
pp. 926–934, 2018.

Jiawei Zhang received the B.S. degree in 2020 from
the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, where he is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Automation.
His research interests include intelligent transportation systems, autonomous driving, connected and automated vehicles, and deep reinforcement learning.

1259

Jingwei Ge is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. His research interests include intelligent transportation systems, intelligence
testing, and autonomous vehicles testing.

Shu Li is currently working toward the bachelor’s
degree with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. His research interests include connected and automated vehicles and intelligent transportation systems.

Shen Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Wisconsin C Madison, Madison, WI, USA, in 2018. He is currently a Research
Associate with Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include intelligent transportation systems, architecture design of CAVH system,
vehicle-infrastructure cooperative planning and decision method, traffic data mining based on cellular
data, and traffic operations and management.

Li Li (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor with
the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, working in the fields of artificial intelligence, intelligent control and sensing,
intelligent transportation systems, and intelligent vehicles. He has authored or coauthored more than
170 SCI-indexed international journal articles and
more than 70 international conference papers as a
first/corresponding author. He is a Member of the Editorial Advisory Board of the Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, and a Member of the
Editorial Board of the Transport Reviews and Acta Automatica Sinica. He is
also an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

