12196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

GE-DDRL: Graph Embedding and Deep
Distributional Reinforcement Learning for
Reliable Shortest Path: A Universal
and Scale Free Solution
Hongliang Guo , Member, IEEE, Wenda Sheng , Yingjie Zhou , Member, IEEE,
and Yunping Chen , Member, IEEE

Abstract— This paper studies the reliable shortest path (RSP)
problem in stochastic transportation networks. State-of-the-art
RSP solutions usually target one specific RSP problem; moreover,
the corresponding algorithm’s computational complexity scales
at least linearly with the size of the underlying transportation
network. While in this paper, we propose a graph embedding and
deep distributional reinforcement learning (GE-DDRL) method,
which serves as a universal and scale-free solution to the RSP
problem. GE-DDRL uses deep distributional reinforcement learning (DDRL) to estimate the full travel-time distribution of a
given routing policy, and improves the given routing policy with
the generalized policy iteration (GPI) scheme. Further, in order
to achieve the generalization ability to new destination nodes,
we employ one of the canonical graph embedding techniques
(Skip-Gram) to compress the nodes’ representation into
d-dimensional real-valued vectors. With the properly compressed
node features, GE-DDRL is able to generalize its estimation of the
routing policy’s travel-time distribution to untrained destination
nodes, and hence achieve the ‘all-to-all’ navigation functionality.
To the best of our knowledge, GE-DDRL serves as the first
RSP planner, which applies simultaneously to almost all RSP
objectives and in the meanwhile, is scale free with the size
of the transportation network in terms of the online decisionmaking time and memory complexity. Experimental results and
comparisons with state of the arts show the efficacy and efficiency
of GE-DDRL in a range of transportation networks.
Index Terms— Reliable shortest path (RSP), distributional
reinforcement learning (DRL), universal and scale free solution,
graph embedding and deep distributional reinforcement learning
(GE-DDRL), skip-gram.

N

I. I NTRODUCTION
AVIGATING reliably in stochastic transportation networks serves as one of the prevalent research topics

Manuscript received 16 July 2022; revised 5 February 2023 and 7 May
2023; accepted 8 June 2023. Date of publication 22 June 2023; date of current
version 1 November 2023. This work was supported in part by the 111 Project
under Grant B21044 and in part by the Sichuan Science and Technology
Program under Grant 2023NSFSC1965. The Associate Editor for this article
was F. Chu. (Hongliang Guo and Wenda Sheng contributed equally to this
work.) (Corresponding author: Yingjie Zhou.)
Hongliang Guo and Yingjie Zhou are with the College of Computer
Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610017, China (e-mail:
scott0793@gmail.com; yjzhou09@gmail.com).
Wenda Sheng and Yunping Chen are with the School of Automation
Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: ningenpre@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2023.3285770

among intelligent transportation system (ITS) applications, and
has been attracting increasing attentions from both academic
researchers and industrial entrepreneurs over the past several
decades, see [1], [2], [3], [4], and [5] as examples. The
reliability metric in the navigation task has various definitions
in the literature, and in this paper, we roughly divide them
into three categories, namely (1) maximal stochastic on-time
arrival (SOTA) probability, (2) minimal travel time with high
percentile confidence (α-reliable shortest path), and (3) minimal linear combination of mean and standard deviation (meanstd shortest path).
While a range of methodologies have been proposed to
solve the reliable navigation problem, i.e., finding the reliable
shortest path (RSP), and a brief literature review will be
provided in the next section. Here, we wish to articulate that,
to the best of our knowledge, almost all existing RSP planning
algorithms are specifically devised to solve one particular
reliable navigation objective, e.g., SOTA, α-reliable, meanstd, and it is very difficult, if not impossible, to directly apply
one algorithm’s solution to another RSP objective. However,
in reality, a traveller might decide his/her travel objective at
will, and might even switch the path planning objective during
navigation. For example, imagine that a traveller is going to
the office, and his/her original objective is to minimize the
mean-std of total travel time. During navigation, his/her boss
calls and says that there is an urgent meeting scheduled half
an hour later, and he/she must attend the meeting in person.
In this case, his/her navigation objective is switched to SOTA,
which finds a routing policy with the maximal probability of
on-time arrival before the meeting begins. Another example
is when a traveller tries to catch a flight, and his/her original
objective is to arrive at the airport on time, i.e., the SOTA
objective. However, during navigation, he/she finds that due
to weather conditions, the flight is delayed by several hours,
and the traveller might switch to other RSP objectives, such
as minimal mean-std, or α-reliable.
Therefore, it is better to have one unified RSP solution, which caters to almost all RSP objectives, including
but not limited to SOTA, mean-std, and α-reliable, and in
the meanwhile reacts fast to the changing user needs or
the emerging new objectives, e.g., minimal expected delay,

1558-0016 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

constrained and/or multi-objective RSP. Moreover, consider
the use case of navigating the ego vehicle to a completely
new destination, which hasn’t been trained as the destination
node before. It is very difficult, if not impossible, for other
RSP planners to plan a path connecting the origin node with
the completely new destination node. While the proposed
algorithm, namely GE-DDRL, possesses the characteristic of
offering the generalized travel-time distribution estimation and
thereby is able to navigate the ego vehicle to the unforeseen
destination node with up-to-standard performance.
This paper develops a graph embedding and deep distributional reinforcement learning (GE-DDRL) methodology as
a universal and scale-free solution to the reliable navigation
problem. GE-DDRL has two phases, namely the offline training phase and the online decision making phase. For the
offline training phase, GE-DDRL employs deep distributional
reinforcement learning (DDRL) to estimate the full traveltime distribution of a given routing policy and improves it
through the generalized policy iteration (GPI) scheme. Further,
in order to achieve the generalization ability to new destination
nodes, GE-DDRL uses one of the canonical graph embedding
techniques, i.e., Skip-Gram, to compress the node representation into a d-dimensional real-valued vector. With properly
compressed node feature vector, the DDRL module within GEDDRL is able to generalize its estimation of the routing policy’s travel-time distribution to unforeseen destination nodes,
and thereby yield ‘up-to-standard’ routing services. For the
online decision-making phase, we simply calculate different
action values with respect to the reliability metric with the
pre-trained GE-DDRL model, and let the ego vehicle select
the best action to execute.
When compared with state-of-the-art solutions to the RSP
problem, GE-DDRL has the following characteristics (which
constitute the paper’s contributions, as well): (1) universal,
in that GE-DDRL applies to all the three aforementioned
RSP objectives; (2) scale-free in the online decision-making
phase, which makes GE-DDRL applicable to arbitrarily large
scale transportation networks, barring the possibly large offline
training time; (3) model-free, which means that GE-DDRL
takes samples of edges’ travel times as inputs instead of any
form of the travel-time distribution models; and (4) generalizable across different destination nodes for both training and
deployment phases, i.e., GE-DDRL is able to generalize its
distributional modeling functionality and hence is still able to
make good routing decisions, for unforeseen destination nodes,
as long as those nodes have been compressed properly in the
graph embedding process.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a brief literature review of the reliable shortest path
problem along the taxonomies of its objectives, travel-time
assumptions and methodologies in Section II, followed by the
mathematical problem formulations for all RSP problems and
related background knowledge in Section III. The GE-DDRL
methodology is presented in Section IV, and we compare and
analyze the performance of GE-DDRL with state of the arts
in a range of transportation networks in Section V. The paper
ends with conclusion and future work in Section VI.

12197

II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
In this section, we first deliver a brief literature review of
reliable shortest path along the taxonomies of its (1) objectives,
(2) assumptions and (3) methodologies. After that, we present
the techniques of graph embedding (GE) and distributional
reinforcement learning (DRL) as they serve as the main
ingredients of the GE-DDRL framework.
A. Reliable Shortest Path
1) RSP Planning Objectives: Various definitions of the term
‘reliability’ have been proposed in the RSP literature, and
in this paper, we roughly divide them into three categories,
namely, (1) SOTA, (2) α-reliable and (3) mean-std.1 The SOTA
RSP, first proposed in [10], aims at finding a reliable shortest
path with the maximal on-time arrival probability within a
predefined travel-time budget. The α-reliable shortest path,
coined by Chen and Ji in [11], defines a path with the minimal
high percentile travel time, as the most reliable one. The
mean-std shortest path, first proposed in [12], incorporates
the standard deviation of a path’s travel time directly into
problem formulation, either as a constraint [13] or as an
additional term in the objective function [6], [7], [14], [15].
The most prevailing mean-std shortest path objective among
other definitions, is to find a path with the minimal linear
combination of mean and standard deviation, see [7], [16],
[17], and [18] as examples.
2) Travel-Time Assumptions: Different spatial temporal
distribution modelings of the underlying transportation networks will lead to different RSP planning perspectives. For
travel time’s spatial distribution, some researchers presume a
stochastic transportation network with independent travel time
distributions over different edges, see [7], [8], [15], [19], and
[20] as examples, while others consider a spatially correlated
travel time distribution [6], [9], [17], [18], [21]. For temporal
distribution, most of the researchers presume a stationary
travel-time distribution, which does not change during the path
planning and execution phase [18], [22], while there are a
few researchers who are specifically targeting the dynamic,
i.e., time-varying travel time distribution, and propose corresponding RSP planning algorithms, see [23], [24], [25], and
[26] as examples. Here, we wish to point out that GE-DDRL
presumes that the underlying transportation network has a
stationary and independent travel time distribution. However,
it does not need the explicit modelling of the travel time
distribution as inputs, instead, the randomly drawn samples
are used to update the parameters of GE-DDRL, which makes
it a ‘model-free’ solution.
3) RSP Methodologies: Although different RSP objectives
require different algorithms as specific solutions, we can
still broadly summarize the prevailing RSP planning algorithms into three groups, namely (1) dynamic programming
(DP) based methodology, (2) mathematical programming (MP)
based methodology and (3) genetic programming (GP) based
methodology.
1 Note that the three-category RSP objective summarization originates in [6],
and later has also been adopted in [7], [8], and [9].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

DP-based methods establish the recursive relationship
between the current node and its neighbors, and apply dynamic
programming (DP) or its variants to iteratively approximate
the node’s value [23], [25], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32].
Thereafter, labelling and/or pruning techniques can be applied
to improve the computational efficiency. For example, Fan et
al. propose a successive approximation (SA) algorithm to
iteratively approximate the node’s maximal on-time arrival
probability within a given budget [28]; later they prove SA’s
convergence [33], and further improve SA’s algorithm to converge within a finite number of steps for discrete distribution
models [34].
MP-based methods usually formulate the RSP problem into
a monolithic mathematical optimization problem, and invoke
related mathematical programming (MP) techniques to reach
the optimal solution, see [26], [35], [36], [37] as examples.
For example, Cao et al. formulate the SOTA RSP problem
into an integer linear programming problem, and invoke the
off-the-shelf solver, i.e., CPLEX, to calculate the optimal
solution [37]. One disadvantage of using commercial solvers
to solve the monolithic optimization problem, is that the
computational complexity is high, which makes the algorithm
inapplicable to large-scale metropolitan cities. Recently, there
is a growing trend of using the (partial) Lagrangian method
to convert some of the constraints into the objective function,
and thereafter decompose the monolithic problem into several
easy-to-solve sub-problems. In this way, the computational
efficiency is greatly improved, and related algorithms are
easily applied to large scale transportation networks, see [16],
[17], [26], [36], and [38] as examples.
GP-based methods target the RSP problem from the genetic
programming (GP) perspective [11], [21], [39], [40]. Within
the GP framework, the RSP objective is defined as the fitness
value, and mutation and crossover operations are employed
to generate new RSP paths as seeds and offspring for GP’s
fitness evaluation. GP’s computational and evaluation process is derivative-free, and thus the computational complexity depends solely on the number of seeds and offspring
layers per generation. For example, Chen et al. propose a
moment matching based hybrid genetic algorithm (MHGA)
to solve the α-reliable shortest path problem. MHGA starts
with a random set of feasible paths connecting the origin
node with the destination node, and gradually improves the
fitness values as the evolutionary procedure continues, until
the algorithm converges or the predefined computation time
limit is reached [41].
To the best of our knowledge, almost all RSP methodologies
can be deemed as ‘specific’ algorithms, in that they are
devised to solve one specific RSP objective, e.g., SOTA,
α-reliable shortest path, mean-std shortest path. It is generally
very difficult, if not impossible, to adapt the RSP algorithm
to be applicable to two or more RSP objectives. On the
other hand, GE-DDRL estimates the full distribution of a
given policy’s travel time, and thereafter makes generalized
policy iteration with respect to the specific RSP objective.
Therefore, GE-DDRL is naturally applicable to all the three
aforementioned RSP objectives, and potentially to other path
planning objectives that may not have been included. We term

this characteristic of GE-DDRL as ‘universal’, in that it applies
‘universally’ to almost all the RSP objectives.
B. Graph Embedding
Graph has been deemed as one of the most important data
representation schemes, which appear in a wide range of
application scenarios, e.g., biology, social science, linguistics.
Effective graph analytics provide researchers with a deeper
understanding of what is behind the data, and thus can benefit
a lot of useful applications, see [42] and [43] as application
examples for seismic-related applications. Graph embedding,
as one of the most important graph analytic tools, offers
an effective way of representing the underlying structural
information of a given graph [44]. It compresses the graphrelated entities, i.e., nodes, edge and sub-graphs into lowdimensional vectors, and in the meanwhile, preserves the
underlying structural information to the end user.
In graph embedding, the proximity between nodes is the
most important concept. Proximity gauges the relationship
between two nodes. First-order proximity refers to nodes
which are connected directly by an edge, and the weight,
e.g., cost, of the edge is the first-order proximity value
between the two nodes. Higher-order proximity is defined
recursively. For example, k th -order proximity refers to two
nodes that are connected to each other with k edges. Graph
embedding techniques are, therefore, to embed nodes into lowdimensional vectors, while preserving the proximity between
nodes [45].
The technologies for graph embedding can be broadly
categorized into three groups, namely, matrix factorization,
random walk, and deep learning methods. matrix factorization
(MF) represents the attributes of a graph with a matrix, and
employ the factorization techniques to obtain low-dimensional
node embedding [46], [47], [48], [49]. While the random walk
technology will generate the node sequences with random
walk, and use word2vec technique in the natural language
processing (NLP) domain to compress the node sequence
into d-dimensional vectors [50]. Recently, there is a growing
trend of employing deep learning techniques for graph embedding. For example, graph convolutional network (GCN) [51]
defines the convolution operators on the graph and iteratively
aggregates the neighborhood embeddings of the nodes. Later
developments improve the GCN encoder to consider higherorder proximity between nodes, see [52] and [53] as examples.
C. Distributional Reinforcement Learning
Different from canonical reinforcement learning, which
estimates and thereby optimizes the expected value of a given
policy’s return, distributional reinforcement learning targets
the full distribution of a policy’s return, i.e., the policy’s value
distribution. With the estimated value distribution, one can
perform policy optimization with respect to a much more generalized set of objectives. DRL is mostly useful for risk-averse
applications, where the user cares more the policy’s value-atrisk (VaR) performance than the average performance of a
policy. Bellemare et al. propose the first DRL method, named
as C51, which advances the traditional Bellman equation to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

its distributional counterpart, and uses a fixed number of bins
to approximate the full value distribution [54].
Later, Dabney et al. propose a quantile regression method,
named as QR-DQN, to automatically adjust the location of
bins and employ the quantile regression for better distribution
approximation [55]. QR-DQN improves C51 both empirically
and theoretically, however, the quantile points are still subject
to pre-selection. The authors continue to improve QR-DQN
by automatically adjusting quantile locations with deep neural
networks, and jointly optimize the location of the quantile
points and the quantile distribution values [56]. In this way,
the approximated distribution can be infinitely close to the
true distribution as long as a large enough number of samples
are provided. However, in reality, the data samples cannot be
infinite. Yang et al. propose the FPN-QVN method, which
parameterizes the value distribution with quantile proposal
points and regressed quantile values [57]. In FPN-QVN, the
quantiles and their corresponding values are parameterized, the
quantiles is adjusted following the characteristics of different
distribution, and the values of the quantiles are obtained
through quantile regression.

12199

TABLE I
L IST OF M AJOR N OTATIONS U SED IN THE PAPER

III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND BACKGROUNDS
In this section, we first introduce the major notations
used throughout the paper, and then present the mathematical
problem formulations for all the three aforementioned RSP
problems. Lastly, since GE-DDRL employs graph embedding
and deep distributional reinforcement learning as its main
functional modules, we lay down the related background
knowledge of DDRL and GE towards the end of this section.
Here, we wish to note that since GE-DDRL essentially
formulates the path planning problem within the Markov
decision process (MDP) framework, it naturally requires that
the underlying transportation network’s travel-time distribution is independent and stationary. We put the extension of
GE-DDRL’s application to the use case of spatially correlated
and/or time-varying transportation networks as one of the
future work directions.
A. Notations
The transportation network is represented by a directed
and

connected graph G = (N , E ), where
N
|N
|
=
n
refers
to

the set of nodes and E |E | = m refers to the set of edges.
Assume that travel time ci j of edge i j ∈ E , is a parameter,
which is depicted with mean µi j > 0 and standard deviation
σi j . Let (õ, d̃) be a user-specified origin-destination (OD) pair,
and a path is represented by an incidence vector x ∈ {0, 1}m ,
with ones corresponding to the edges contained in the path,
and zeros otherwise. Path x’s travel time is denoted as c x ,
with its mean and standard deviation values represented as
µ x and σ x , respectively. The complete set of feasible paths
connecting õ to d̃ is denoted as Pod . Table I summarizes a
list of major notations used in the paper, where the first set of
notations is the transportation network related, the second set
is RSP related, the third set is DDRL related and the last set
of nations is graph embedding related. Note that we will also
briefly describe the related notations when they are introduced
for the first time in the main contents of the paper.

B. Mathematical Problem Formulations for RSP
Since GE-DDRL serves as a universal solution for all
the three aforementioned RSP planning problems, we deliver
the corresponding mathematical problem formulations in the
following paragraphs.
1) The SOTA RSP Problem: The SOTA RSP’s objective is
to find a path which maximizes the probability of on-time
arrival at the destination within a predefined path planning
budget T . The mathematical problem can be formulated as:
maximize

P(c x ≤ T )

subject to

x ∈ Pod ,

x

(1)

where T is the user-specified path planning budget and c x
represents the total travel time of Path x.
2) The α-Reliable Shortest Path Problem: The objective is
to find a path with the minimal travel time (t) subject to a
certain confidence level α, which is formulated as:
maximize
x,t

t
P(c x ≤ t) ≥ α

subject to

x ∈ Pod ,

(2)

where α is the user-specified confidence level.
3) The Mean-Std Shortest Path Problem: The objective is
to find a path with the minimal linear combination of mean
and standard deviation, which is formulated:
maximize µ x + ζ σ x
x

subject to

x ∈ Pod ,

where ζ is the predefined reliability coefficient.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(3)

12200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

C. Distributional Reinforcement Learning
Distributional reinforcement learning, first proposed in [54],
targets estimating the value distribution, i.e., the full distribution of a policy’s return, instead of the return’s expectation.
In DRL, the underlying dynamics is also modeled as a
Markov decision process (MDP) with the five-element tuple,
′
(X , A , R, Pss,a , γ ), where X and A represent the state and
action spaces, respectively; R is the scalar reward function;
′
Pss,a is the state transition kernel, and γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount
factor. For a given policy π , the value distribution of π for
state-action pair (s, a), denoted as Z π (s, a), is recursively
estimated with the following distributional Bellman equation:
Z π (s, a) := r (s, a) + γ Z π (s ′ , a ′ ).

(4)

Note that the equal sign in Eq. (4) means that the two
distributions are ‘equivalent’. The pioneering work in [54]
approximates Z π (s, a) with a fixed number (51 in the paper)
of bins. Since then, various extensions have been proposed.
In GE-DDRL, we adopt the FPN-QVN framework [57] to
represent the full distribution of π ’s return, where the node
in the transportation network, which is the state in the DDRL
domain, is represented by a fixed d-dimensional real-valued
vector. In this way, Z π (s, a) is approximated by a quantile
value network (QVN), and the evaluated quantile points are
proposed by a fraction proposal network (FPN). Details will
be presented in Section IV-E.
D. Graph Embedding: Skip-Gram
In order to reach a scale-free RSP solution, we need to
compress the distinct node representation of a transportation
network into a fixed d-dimensional real-valued vector through
the graph embedding technique. Hence, in this subsection,
we introduce the basics of graph embedding. Graph embedding
transforms the property graphs into a vector or a set of vectors. The embedding process should capture the graph topology, node-to-node relationship, and other relevant information
about the graph. GE-DDRL employs one of the prevalent
graph embedding techniques, namely, skip-gram, to encode
the nodes in a graph into real-valued vectors.
Skip-gram is an unsupervised learning technique to find the
most relevant words for a given word, and is traditionally a natural language processing (NLP) technique which transforms
words into real-valued vectors, namely, word2vec. It aims at
maximizing the co-occurrence probability of words that appear
together in a sentence.
Let φ : V → Rd represent the mapping function from a
collection of words to d-dimensional feature vectors; µ ∈ V
is a word in a sentence, and N (µ) represent the collection
of neighboring words of µ. The goal of skip-gram is to find
the mapping function φ, which maximizes the probability
of co-occurrence of the words in the sentences, and can be
expressed as:
X

max
log P φ(N (µ))|φ(µ) ,
(5)
φ

µ∈V


where P φ(N (µ))|φ(µ) is the probabilistic function capturing the co-occurrence probability of a set of words.

TABLE II
T RANSPORTATION - TO -DRL T ERMINOLOGY T RANSLATION

For details about how to represent the probability relationship
between words and how to optimize Eq. (5), one may refer to
Section II-B or the seminal work for skip-gram in [50].
IV. G RAPH E MBEDDING AND D EEP D ISTRIBUTIONAL
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING (GE-DDRL)
This section presents the GE-DDRL framework as a universal and scale-free solution to the RSP problem. We first
transform the RSP’s mathematical problem formulation to
the distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) perspective,
and then present the bird’s-eye view of GE-DDRL’s overall
framework and its pseudo code in an abstract form. After that,
we deliver the tabular DRL solution to the RSP problem as
the simplest version of GE-DDRL; introduce the skip-gram
scheme to encode nodes into real-valued vectors, and finally
extend the tabular DRL solver to the FPN-QVN paradigm,
which, together with skip-gram, functions as a full-fledged
GE-DDRL methodology.
A. RSP’s Problem Re-Formulation From the DRL Perspective
In the last section, we have presented the mathematical problem formulation of RSP problems. However, in
GE-DDRL, we treat the RSP problem as a sequential decision
making problem within the MDP framework. The key of the
problem re-formulation process is to properly map the MDPrelated elements, i.e., X , A , R, P, γ into the path planning
related variables, and express the corresponding RSP objectives with MDP terminologies.
The mapping process, which is also depicted in Table II, is
as follows: (1) the state of the ego vehicle (s) is the vehicle’s
located node, e.g., Node i, the absorbing state2 is Node d̃;
(2) the action of the vehicle (a) is the edge that the vehicle
executes, e.g., Edge i j; (3) the immediate reward r is the
sampled travel time of Edge i j, i.e., ci j ; (4) the state transition
function P is a deterministic function, which transports the
vehicle to the end node of the current executing link, e.g.,
s ′ = j where j ∈ N ; (5) the discount factor γ = 1 in RSP
planning, and will be omitted most of the time. A routing
policy π determines the next-executing edge (a) of the vehicle
given its current state (s), e.g., a = π(s). The return of policy
π starting at (s, a), i.e., Z π (s, a), is the total travel time
distribution of policy π starting at (s, a). Similarly, Z π (s)
refers to the value distribution of policy π when the vehicle
2 The absorbing state, s , in RL refers to the state that ends the episode,
o
and it corresponds to the destination node (Node d̃) in the RSP domain.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

12201

Fig. 1. The GE-DDRL Framework: (1) the graph embedding module (Skip-Gram) takes the node sequences as inputs and outputs the embedded feature
vector; (2) The DDRL module (FPN-QVN) takes the embedded state features as inputs, and outputs the estimated full travel-time distribution of the routing
policy; (3) the policy improvement module takes the estimated distribution as inputs and outputs the improved routing policy. Green bordered parts are module
inputs, and blue bordered contents are module outputs.

starts at s and follows policy π for action selections. Note that
from this point on, we will use the terms ‘state’ and ‘node’
interchangeably, e.g., si refers to a state as well as a node, and
the terms ‘action’ and ‘edge’ interchangeably, e.g., ai refers
to an action as well as the executing edge.
Depending on the specific RSP objectives, different optimal
routing policy with respect to Z π (s) can be defined. For
example, for SOTA RSP, the objective is to:
max P[Z π (s) ≤ T ],
π

(6)

for α-reliable shortest path, the objective is to:
min

t

s. t.

P[Z π (s) ≤ t] ≥ α,

π,t

(7)

and for the mean-std shortest path problem, the objective
is to:
min E[Z π (s)] + ζ σ (Z π (s)).
π

(8)

B. Bird’s-Eye View of GE-DDRL
Before presenting each functional component of GE-DDRL,
we deliver a bird’s-eye view of GE-DDRL’s overall framework
in Fig. 1. In the figure, we can see that with a set of
trajectories, the skip-gram scheme is used to encode nodes
into d-dimensional real-valued vectors, which together with
the experience tuples, are fed into the DDRL framework.
Then, DDRL employs the fraction proposal network (FPN)
and the quantile value network (QVN) to jointly estimate the
full distribution of a given policy’s return. With the generalized
policy iteration module, DDRL updates the policy towards the
optimal one. The updated policy will generate new batches of

trajectories, which will also be fed into the skip-gram scheme
for updated node feature vectors. In the following several
subsections, we will introduce all the functional modules
within the GE-DDRL framework in detail.
Algorithm 1 GE-DDRL
Input: (1) transportation network: G(N , E ); (2)
origin-destination pair: õ, d̃; (3) RSP
objective-related parameter: T /α/ζ ; (4) number
of quantiles: N ; (5) max number of training
episodes of GE-DDRL: Epimax .
Output: optimal RSP routing policy: π ∗ .
Init: (1) initialize FPN and QVN parameters; (2)
initialize skip-gram related parameters; (3)
initialize a collection of trajectories with random
walk: 0; (4) epi ←
− 0.
1 while epi ≤ Epimax do
2
φ←
− skip-gram(0, d, αe ) // see Alg. 3;
3
π←
− FPN-QVN(G, õ, d̃, T /α/ζ, φ) // see Alg. 4;
4
generate trajectories based on π ;
5
add the newly generated trajectories to 0;
6
epi ←
− epi + 1;
7
8

π∗ ←
− π;
return π ∗ ;

The overall algorithm flow process of GE-DDRL is presented in Algorithm 1. Note that Algorithm 1 presents GEDDRL in a highly abstract form, one may refer to Algorithm 3
and Algorithm 4 for the detailed computational processes of
skip-gram and FPN-QVN, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

C. Tabular DRL as a Universal Solution to the RSP Problem
This subsection presents the tabular DRL solution to the
RSP problem as the simplest version of GE-DDRL. Treating
each node in the transportation network as a distinct state
and each edge as a distinct action in the MDP framework,
we approximate the full distribution of policy π ’s return with
a fixed number of bins, i.e., Z π (s, a) is represented by a
categorical distribution with a fixed number of basis (N ) and
fixed window size per basis (δw). Recall the distributional
Bellman equation in Eq. (4), and suppose that we get a specific
transition sample as (s, a, r, s ′ , a ′ ), we can update Z π (s, a) as
follows:
Z π (s, a) ←
− r + Z π (s ′ , a ′ ).

(9)

Note that the right hand side of Eq. (9) serves as the update
target of Z π (s, a). However, different from traditional learning
algorithms, which perform updates towards a scalar value,
Eq. (9) is effectively updating a probabilistic distribution.
In this case, we need to define a scalar objective, and use
the gradient descent method to update Z π (s, a). In tabular
DRL, we use the Wasserstein distance [58] between Z π (s, a)
and r + Z π (s ′ , a ′ ) as the scalar objective, which is the same
as the one used in [54]. Computing the gradient with respect
to the Wasserstein distance, Z π (s, a) can be updated as:

Z π (s, a) = Z π (s, a) + αt T (r + Z π (s ′ , a ′ )) − Z π (s, a) ,
(10)
where 0 ≤ αt ≤ 1 is the learning rate, and T (r + Z π (s ′ , a ′ ))
is a function, which transforms the discrete distribution representation of (r + Z π (s ′ , a ′ )) to fit the distribution basis of
Z π (s, a), and hence makes the summation of two distributions
valid. We will present a simple example in Section V-A to
illustrate the distribution basis transformation process. Note
that, Eq. (10) is essentially calculating the summation of two
vectors, and thus the ‘+’ symbol in Eq. (10) refers to the
element-wise summation between two vectors.
With Eq. (10), one is able to estimate the full distribution
of a given routing policy’s return. In the following, we will
provide a simple yet effective online generalized policy iteration scheme which fits with any user-defined RSP objective.
We first transform Z π (s, a) into a scalar objective value, i.e.,
obj(s, a), based on the user-defined RSP objective, and then
adopt an ϵ-greedy action selection strategy based on the
calculated obj values.
For the SOTA RSP problem, obj(s, a) = P[Z π (s, a) ≥ T ];
note that obj(s, a) for the SOTA RSP problem refers to
the estimated delay probability of Z π (s, a) instead of the
actual on-time-arrival probability. For the α-reliable shortest
path problem, obj(s, a) = min t, such that P[Z π (s, a) ≤
t] ≥ α. For the mean-std shortest path problem, obj(s, a) =
E[Z π (s, a)] + ζ σ (Z π (s, a)). With the calculated obj(s, a)
values, one can design an online adaptive strategy as: a =
argmin aobj(s, a) with probability 1 − ϵ, and any available
action with probability ϵ/N (s), where N (s) refers to the total
number of available actions at state s. Here, we wish to note
that with the return’s full distribution, i.e., Z π (s, a), estimated
with either the tabular DRL method or the deep DRL method

in the following subsection, evaluating the corresponding
probabilistic items, e.g., on-time arrival probability, α-quantile
value, mean and standard deviation (std), is straightforward.
One may just perform numerical calculations based on the
cumulative distribution function, and obtain the values of
related probabilistic items.
So far, we have introduced the tabular DRL methodology as
the universal solution to the RSP problem, and the corresponding pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 2. In Algorithm 2,
we can see that the tabular DRL method essentially loops from
the policy evaluation step (Eq. (10)) and the action selection
step (ϵ-greedy with respect to the obj values).
Algorithm 2 Tabular DRL for RSP
Input: (1) transportation network: G(N , E ); (2)
origin-destination pair: õ, d̃; (3) RSP
objective-related parameter: T /α/ζ ; (4) max
training episodes: Epimax ; (5) learning rate of
DRL: αt ; (6) number of basis: N ; (7) window
size per basis: δw.
Output: optimal policy’s return distribution: Z ∗ (s, a).
Init: (1) Z (s, a) = (1/(N δw),1/(N δw),. . .,1/(N δw))⊤;
(2) epi ←
− 0.
1 while epi < Epimax do
2
s = õ;
3
A(s) = Edge(s) // return the edge set starting at s;
4
foreach a ∈ A(s) do
5
Calculate obj(s, a) based on Z (s, a) with
respect to the specific RSP objective, e.g.,
SOTA, α-reliable, mean-std;
6

7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15

Choose a from A(s) with respect to obj(s, a) (e.g.,
ϵ-greedy) ;
while s ̸ = d̃ do
Execute action a, observe r, s ′ ;
foreach a ′ ∈ A(s ′ ) do
Calculate obj(s ′ , a ′ ) based on Z (s ′ , a ′ ) with
respect to the specific RSP objective, e.g.,
SOTA, α-reliable, mean-std;
Choose a ′ from A(s ′ ) with respect to
obj(s ′ , a ′ ) (e.g., ϵ-greedy);

Z (s, a) ←
− Z (s, a)+αt T (r+Z (s ′ , a ′ ))−Z (s, a) ;
s←
− s′;
a←
− a′;
epi ←
− epi + 1;

∗
16 Z (s, a)
17

←
− Z (s, a);
return Z ∗ (s, a)

D. Skip-Gram for Node Feature Embedding
In the last subsection, we have presented the tabular DRL
as a universal solution to the RSP problem. However, there are
two disadvantages of the tabular DRL method. Firstly, it lacks
the generalization ability, e.g., it is impossible to generalize the
trained Z π (s, a) distribution parameters to another unforeseen
state-action pair. Secondly, the tabular DRL method is not

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

scale-free in terms of memory and decision making, in that
when the number of nodes or edges increases, the corresponding new Z π (s, a) distribution parameters have to be allocated
and trained. In view of these disadvantages, in this subsection,
we employ the skip-gram method to encode the nodes in
a graph into fixed d-dimensional real-valued vectors, which
opens the possibility of scale-free and generalizable solutions
of GE-DDRL.
As we have stated in the last section, skip-gram is a
word2vec embedding scheme for NLP applications. It takes
the sentences of words as inputs and output the embedded
feature vectors of the words in the vocabulary. In this paper,
we adapt the skip-gram scheme to take the trajectories of nodes
as inputs and output the embedded features for the nodes in
the transportation network.
Given a collection of node trajectories, denoted as 0,
if Node i (denoted as si in the MDP framework) is contained
by any trajectory ~ ∈ 0, we say si ∈ 0. s j refers to the
subsequent node of si with respect to 0, if there exists a
trajectory ~ ∈ 0, where s j is the next node of si , and we
denote N (si ) as the set of subsequent nodes of si conforming
to 0. The objective of skip-gram is to find d-dimensional
real-valued vectors to represent all the nodes contained in 0,
which maximizes the log likelihood of the nodes’ subsequent
relationship occurrence. The problem can be formulated as:
X X
max
log P[φ(s j )|φ(si )],
(11)
φ

si ∈0 s j ∈N (si )

where P[φ(s j )|φ(si )] is calculated as:
P[φ(s j )|φ(si )] = P


exp φ(si )⊤ φ(s j )
s∈0

.
exp φ(s)⊤ φ(si )

(12)

The features of all the nodes in 0 can be updated through the
gradient ascent method with respect to Eq. (11).
So far, we have introduced the node feature embedding
process with the skip-gram scheme, similar to the node2vec
scheme [59]. The next natural question is how to generate/obtain the set of trajectories covering all the nodes in the
graph. In this paper, we initialize the trajectory set with LET
path induced node sequence as the ‘sentence library’, and
then gradually add to the trajectory set with the trajectories
generated by the GE-DDRL induced policy. The underlying
rationale is that a specific node sequence which corresponds
to the reliable shortest path solution should be embedded as
‘near’ to each other in the d-dimensional space. In this way, the
node-embedding process (through skip-gram) helps with the
reliable shortest path selection, and reversely, the selected reliable shortest path trajectory set helps with the node-embedding
process. We believe that with trajectories generated by the
GE-DDRL induced policy, the embedded node features will
be better shaped towards a good representation for the RSP
objective. The pseudo code for the node feature embedding
process through skip-gram is presented in Algorithm 3.
E. FPN-QVN as a Scale-Free Solution to RSP
We have presented the tabular DRL methodology and the
skip-gram scheme to embed graph nodes into d-dimensional

12203

Algorithm 3 Skip-Gram for Node Embedding
Input: (1) collection of node trajectories: 0; (2) node
embedding dimension: d; (3) learning rate of
skip-gram: αe .
Output: embedded d-dimensional vector for each
node s ∈ 0: φ(s).
Init: ∀s ∈ 0, randomly initialize φ(s).
1 foreach si ∈ 0 do
2
foreach s j ∈ N (si ) do
3
J (φ) = log P[φ(s j )|φ(si )] ;
∂J
4
φ(si ) = φ(si ) + αe · ∂φ(s
;
i)
∂J
;
5
φ(s j ) = φ(s j ) + αe · ∂φ(s
j)
6

return ∀s ∈ 0 : φ(s)

vectors in the last two subsections, respectively. In this section,
we will make use of the embedded node features, and advance
the tabular DRL methodology to deep distributional reinforcement learning (DDRL). With DDRL, we are able to generalize
the estimated value distribution to ‘unforeseen’ nodes,3 and
make the algorithm scale-free in terms of the memory space
and decision-making time.
Suppose that we already have the feature representation
of any node s, which is φ(s) from the skip-gram scheme,
recall Eq. (9), we have Z π (φ(s), a) ←
− r + Z π (φ(s ′ ), a ′ ).
π
Since Z (φ(s), a) is a distribution, we use N parameterized
bins to approximate it, i.e., Z π (φ(s), a; τ , θ(s, a)), where
τi < τi+1 , ∀i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1} and τ0 = 0, τ N = 1;
θ j (s, a) = P[τ j−1 ≤ Z π (φ(s), a) ≤ τ j ], ∀ j ∈ {1, . . . , N }.
Note that we have two sets of parameters for Z π (φ(s), a),
namely, the adjustable fraction points: τ and the quantilerelated values: θ (s, a). For τ , one can use the fraction proposal
network (FPN) to iteratively approximate the optimal values;
for θ (s, a), one can use the quantile value network (QVN)
to approximate the values. Note that QVN approximates the
quantile values when given τ , i.e., FZ−1 (τ ) = inf(z ∈ R :
FZ (z) ≥ τ ), where FZ (z) refers to the cumulative distribution
function of Z , and θi (s, a) = FZ−1 (τi−1 + τi )/2 . FPN and
QVN function alternatively and in the end, the two sets of
parameters are jointly optimized.
The routing policy π is updated in the same way as what the
tabular DRL does, i.e., ϵ-greedy with respect to the obj values.
The algorithm flow process for FPN-QVN is presented in
Algorithm 4, and for details of FPN-QVN’s derivation process,
one can refer to Appendix B or Section III-A of [57].
F. GE-DDRL’s Generalization Ability to New Destination
In the last two subsections, we introduce, respectively, the
GE module which embeds distinct nodes into d-dimensional
real-valued vectors, and the DDRL module, which essentially
trains a parameterized distributional function to estimate a
3 Here, the term ‘unforeseen’ means that the specific destination node
has never been trained as the destination node before, however, it needs to
have appeared in the collected node trajectories, and thus has been properly
embedded by the graph embedding module. GE-DDRL cannot generalize the
estimation to a completely unseen node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Algorithm 4 FPN-QVN
Input: (1) transportation network: G(N , E ); (2)
origin-destination pair: õ, d̃; (3) RSP
objective-related parameter: T /α/ζ ; (4) max
training episodes: Epimax ; (5) number of
quantiles: N ; (6) skip-gram embedded feature
vectors for all the nodes: φ(s).
Output: optimal policy’s return distribution:
Z ∗ (φ(s), a; τ , θ ).
Init: (1) initialize parameters of FPN and QVN; (2)
epi ←
− 0; (3) t ←
− 0; (4) Replay Buffer = {}.
1 while epi < Epimax do
2
st = õ;
3
while st ̸ = d̃ do
4
A(st ) ←
− Edge(st ) ;
5
foreach a ∈ A(st ) do
6
τ←
− FPN(φ(st ), a) ;
7
FZ−1 (τ ) ←
− QVN(τ, φ(st ), a) ;
8
θi ←
− FZ−1 ( τi−12+τi );
9
Calculate obj(φ(st ), a) based on τ and θ
with respect to the specific RSP objective,
e.g., SOTA, α-reliable, mean-std
10
Choose at from A(st ) with respect to
obj(φ(st ), a) (e.g., ϵ-greedy);
11
Execute action at , observe rt , st+1 ;
12
Add tuple (st , at , rt , st+1 ) to the replay buffer;
13
Train FPN and QVN;
14
t←
−t +1
15
16

epi ←
− epi + 1 ;
return Z ∗

given routing policy’s total travel-time distribution from an
origin node to a destination node. In order for GE-DDRL to
be able to generalize to new destination node, we just need
to augment the input feature vector of the DDRL module
with the embedded destination nodes, i.e., Z π (φ(õ), a) is
augmented to Z π (φ(õ), φ(d̃), a), and we follow the same
procedure, i.e., through the FPN-QVN method (pseudo code
shown in Alg. 4), to train the DDRL module. In this case, the
resulting travel-time distribution estimator is able to generalize
its estimation to the newly supplied destination node vector.
For the new testing OD pair, the GE module will map
both the origin node and the destination node to corresponding d-dimensional real-valued vectors, and then the DDRL
module takes the mapped vectors as inputs and will output
the estimated full travel-time distribution. After that, based on
the specific RSP objective, e.g., SOTA, GE-DDRL will decide
which edge to take.
Here, we deliver a simple example to illustrate why and
how GE-DDRL achieves the generalization ability to ‘unforeseen’ destination nodes, and we will evaluate the performance
of GE-DDRL’s generalization functionality in Section V-E.
Consider a simple straight-line network with five nodes and
four edges, as shown in Fig. 2. For the training process, the
OD pair is set to be õ = 1 and d̃ = 5. The graph embedding

Fig. 2.

Example network topology.

module within GE-DDRL will embed all the five distinct nodes
into d-dimensional real-valued vectors, and the FPN-QVN
module will be trained to take the embedded OD pair feature
vector as inputs and output the corresponding full travel-time
distribution. Since all five nodes have been embedded into
real-valued vectors by the GE module, and the FPN-QVN
module can be deemed as a parameterized function which
maps the embedded OD feature vector to the corresponding
full travel-time distribution, when the user chooses another
OD pair, e.g., õ = 2 and d̃ = 4, the FPN-QVN module is
still able to output the corresponding estimated full travel-time
distribution, and thus GE-DDRL has the generalization ability
to unforeseen destination nodes. Note that in order for the
generalization ability to function effectively, the ‘unforeseen’
nodes, e.g., d̃ = 4 in the example, needs to have appeared in
the ‘sentence library’, and hence are properly embedded by
the GE module within the GE-DDRL framework.
G. Pruning Algorithm to Guarantee Arrival
So far, we have presented all the main functional components within the GE-DDRL framework. However, during the
training process of GE-DDRL, there is no guarantee that it
will navigate the ego vehicle to the exact destination node
because of random initialization and exploration. In view of
that, we propose a pruning algorithm to filter out the suboptimal policy in the exploration step. Here, we wish to note
that the similar pruning algorithms have been adopted to
guarantee arrival in [32], [41], [60], and [61], and thus we
do not treat the pruning algorithm as a novel idea, but deem
it as a functional component to guarantee arrival. The pruning
algorithm is presented in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Pruning Algorithm
Input: (1) Current node st ; (2) Adjacent Candidate
Points A(st );
Output: Filtered candidate nodes A′ (st ).
1 foreach a ∈ A(st ) do
2
if check_feasibility(a) then
3
if LET_cost(a) < LET_cost(st ) then
4
add a into A′ (st )
5

return A′ (st );

H. Application of GE-DDRL to Miscellaneous RSP Problems
In the previous several subsections, we have presented
(1) the tabular DRL method to estimate a given policy’s
full travel-time distribution and thereby optimize the policy
with GPI; (2) graph embedding (GE) to embed nodes into
d-dimensional real-valued vectors; (3) deep distributional reinforcement learning (DDRL) for scale-free and generalizable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

RSP solution; and (4) the pruning algorithm to expedite
training and guarantee arrival. In this subsection, we introduce GE-DDRL’s functionality to RSP problems beyond the
aforementioned three canonical categories. Since GE-DDRL
estimates the generic full travel-time distribution, it applies
to a variety of RSP objectives, including but not limited to
SOTA, mean-std, and α-reliable. We lay down three new RSP
problems which have not been extensively studied in the RSP
literature over the past two decades: (1) the minimal expected
delay problem; (2) the constrained RSP problem; (3) the multiobjective RSP problem.
The minimal expected delay problem is to find a routing
policy which minimized the expectation of delay if it happens.
The constrained RSP problem we propose as an example is
to reach a routing policy with SOTA objective, but subject
to an α-reliable constraint, i.e., the probability that the total
electricity consumption is below a given threshold is greater
than a confidence level (α). The multi-objective RSP problem
we propose as an example is to navigate to the destination
with both minimal α1 and minimal α2 quantile travel time,
i.e., double α-reliable shortest path problem.
For the minimal expected delay problem, let Z π (s, a)
denote the estimated full travel time distribution, and we
calculate the objective value obj(s, a) as follows:
obj(s, a) = E[Z π (s, a)|Z π (s, a) ≥ T ],

obj2 (s, a) = P[Z 2π (s, a) ≤ T2 ],

(14)
(15)

where obj1 and obj2 are the on-time arrival probability
and the probability that total electricity consumption is less
than T2 . One may decide the updated routing policy as
a = arg max [obj1 (s, a)|obj2 (s, a) ≥ α], where α is the predea

fined confidence level. In essence, it means that we select the
edge with maximizes the SOTA probability but subject to an
α-reliable electricity consumption constraint.
Similar to the constrained RSP problem, the multi-objective
RSP problem, e.g., the double α-reliable shortest path problem,
given the preference vector [λ1 , λ2 ], where λ1 , λ2 ≥ 0, the
unified objective value obj is calculated as:
obj(s, a) = λ1 × obj1 (s, a) + λ2 × obj2 (s, a),

TABLE III
S TATE - OF - THE -A RT RSP P LANNING A LGORITHMS

TABLE IV
A LGORITHM PARAMETERS

(13)

where T is the pre-defined path planning budget. In fact,
Eq. (13) is to calculate the conditional expectation of Z π (s, a),
in which the condition is that Z π (s, a) ≥ T . With the full
travel-time distribution, calculating the conditional expectation is straightforward, and one can just follow the definition of conditional expectation to calculate the value. With
obj(s, a) for all the available edges, one can decide a =
argmin aobj(s, a).
For the considered constrained RSP problem, denote
Z 1π (s, a) as the total travel-time distribution, and Z 2π (s, a)
as the total electricity consumption distribution, then, we can
calculate the two obj values as follows:
obj1 (s, a) = P[Z 1π (s, a) ≤ T1 ]

12205

(16)

where obj1 (s, a) and obj2 (s, a) are the α1 -quantile value and
α2 -quantile value of Z π (s, a), respectively. With Eq. (16),
the edge is decided as a = argmin aobj(s, a). For different

preference vectors([λ1 , λ2 ]), we can obtain different solutions,
and hence reach the Pareto optimal solution curve. The related
experimental results for the minimal expected delay RSP, constrained RSP, and multi-objective RSP problems, are presented
in Section V-D.
V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we evaluate GE-DDRL’s performance for
the three aforementioned RSP planning objectives in a range
of transportation networks, and make comparisons with stateof-the-art RSP planning algorithms. Since state-of-the-art RSP
planning algorithms are ‘specific’ ones, which cannot provide
universal solutions, we categorize them into the different
algorithm sets corresponding to different RSP objectives in
Table III.
All the algorithms are implemented in Python 3.7, and we
conduct the experiments on a 2.30 GHz, Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-11800H CPU computer with a 64-bit version of Windows
10 operating system, NVIDIA(R) GeForce(R) RTX 3060 and
32GB RAM. The source code of GE-DDRL is publicly
available,4 with the FPN module of GE-DDRL based on [62].
Table IV summarizes the algorithms’ parameter configurations. Note that (1) the parameters of GE-DDRL are selected
empirically based on GE-DDRL’s average performance and
4 https://github.com/YoZo-X/GE-DDRL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

efficiency, and we skip studying the impact of different
parameter configurations (d and N ) due to page limitations
and (2) for E-PA, we implement the authors’ proposed algorithm with the independent phase-type distributed random
variables, which is referred to as ‘PA-PH’ in the original
manuscript [32].
In the following subsections, we first construct a very
simple network to dissect GE-DDRL’s computational process
(sanity check), which consists of (1) the tabular DRL’s stepby-step computational procedure,
(2) the value distribution’s

evolution process Z (s, a) , (3) the skip-gram scheme’s node
embedding process, (4) the learning process of FPN-QVN
in terms of the parameterized cumulative distribution function; and then we use a slightly more complex network,
i.e., Sioux Falls Network (SFN), with the real mean traveltime information to further evaluate the correctness of GEDDRL. After that, we compare the performance of GE-DDRL
with state of the arts in six realistic transportation networks,
namely, (1) Sioux Falls Network (SFN), (2) Eastern Massachusetts (EM), (2) Anaheim Network (AN), (3) Barcelona
Network (BN) [63], (4) Chengdu Network (CN) [64], and
(5) Minnesota road network (MN) [65]. for all the three
RSP objectives, and we also evaluate the performance of
GE-DDRL for three additional RSP problems, namely the
minimal expected delay problem, constrained RSP problem,
multi-objective RSP problem (double α-reliable shortest path).
Lastly, we evaluate the unique characteristic of GE-DDRL:
the generalization ability to ‘unforeseen’ destination nodes
with pre-trained FPN-QVN parameters. Note that for the first
sanity check, since the test network is too simple, we adopt
smaller d values, e.g., d ∈ {2, 3, 4}, and configure the
related parameters for the tabular DRL with specific parameter
values.
A. Sanity Check With a Simple Network
This subsection performs the sanity check of GE-DDRL
with a simple test network, whose topology is shown in
Fig. 4a. There are 5 nodes and 4 edges in the network, and the
edges’ travel time distributions are depicted in Fig. 4b. Note
that we intentionally design different parametric distributions
for different edges so as to evaluate the ‘model-free’ feature
of tabular DRL.
In the next, we will configure the tabular DRL algorithm,
and depict the step-by-step update procedure of Z (s, a). We set
N = 101, δw = 1, αt = 0.05, Epimax = 800, õ = 1 and
d̃ = 5. The value distributions (Z ) are initialized as Z (1, 1) =
Z (2, 2) = Z (3, 3) = Z (4, 4) = (1/N , 1/N , . . . , 1/N )⊤ , since
δw = 1. We denote Z i (s, a) as the value of the i th bin, i.e.,
the i th bin’s height, for (s, a). Specifically, for 1 ≤ i ≤ N − 1,
we have Z i (s, a) = P[(i − 1) · δw ≤ Z (s, a) ≤ i · δw]; for
i = N , we have Z i (s, a) = P[Z (s, a) ≥ (N − 1) · δw].
1) Tabular DRL’s Step-by-Step Computational Procedure:
We go through one full episode, and dissect the value distribution’s update process for Z (s1 , a1 ) in a step-by-step manner.
Suppose that the ego vehicle starts at Node 1 (s1 = 1) and
proceeds to Node 5, and the collected trajectory is (s1 = 1,
a1 = 1, r1 = 8.7, s2 = 2, a2 = 2, r2 = 11.2, s3 = 3,

a3 = 3, r3 = 15.7, s4 = 4, a4 = 4, r4 = 6.3, s5 = 5).
We have:

Z (s1 , a1 ) = Z (s1 , a1 )+αt T (r1 + Z (s2 , a2 ))− Z (s1 , a1 ) .
(17)
Since Z (s2 , a2 ) = (1/N , 1/N , . . . , 1/N ), r1 + Z (s2 , a2 )
effectively moves the value distribution, i.e., all the bins of
Z (s2 , a2 ), to the right by r1 . Now define the intermediate
value distribution Z ′ = r1 + Z (s2 , a2 ), and we have Z i′ =
1/N , which means that P[r1 + (i − 1) · δw ≤ Z ′ ≤
r1 + i · δw] = 1/N . T (Z ′ ) transforms the new distribution basis (the positions of the bins) to fit the originally
designed distribution basis. For the case of r1 = 8.7, we have
T (Z ′ ) = (0, 0, . . . , 0, 0.3/N , 1/N , 1/N , . . . , 9.7/N ), where
the first 8 elements are zeros; the 9th element is 0.3/N ; the
last element is 9.7/N ; and the remaining elements remain at
1/N . With αt = 0.05, we have
Z (s1 , a1 )

= Z (s1 , a1 ) + αt T (r1 + Z (s2 , a2 )) − Z (s1 , a1 )
= (1 − αt )Z (s1 , a1 ) + αt T (r1 + Z (s2 , a2 ))
= (1 − αt )(1/N , 1/N , . . . , 1/N )
+ αt (0, 0, . . . , 0, 0.3/N , 1/N , 1/N , . . . , 9.7/N )
= (0.95/N , . . . , 0.95/N , 0.965/N , 1/N , . . . , 1.435/N ),
(18)
with the first 8 elements at 0.95/N , the 9th element at
0.965/N , the last element at 1.435/N and the remaining
elements at 1/N . Following the similar procedure, we can
update the value distributions of Z (s2 , a2 ), Z (s3 , a3 ) and
Z (s4 , a4 ). Note that since Node 5 is the absorbing state in
DRL, we initialize Z (s5 ) = 0 for all distribution basis.
2) Evolution Process of Z (s1 , a1 ): We evaluate the ‘correctness’ of tabular DRL through showcasing the evolution
process of Z (s1 , a1 ) with the number of episodes in Fig. 3.
Note that the last sub-figure (Fig. 3e) shows the ‘true’ travel
time distribution of Z (s1 , a1 ) (estimated from the Monte Carlo
method). In the figure, we can visibly observe that the estimated value distribution approximates the ‘true’ distribution
better and better as the number of episodes increases, and one
can barely differentiate the estimated value distribution after
500 episodes from the ‘true’ value distribution obtained from
the Monte Carlo sampling method.
3) Graph Embedding Process With the Skip-Gram Scheme:
We set αe = 1e − 4 for skip-gram, and evaluate its node
embedding process for different d values, i.e., d ∈ {2, 3, 4}.
The collection of node trajectories is 0 = {(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)}. Note
that essentially there is only one valid node trajectory in 0,
and we repeatedly feed the trajectory to the graph embedding
process. We randomly initialize the embedded features of all
the 5 nodes as d-dimensional real-valued vectors. Fig. 5a
shows the evolution process of skip-gram scheme’s objective
value (Eq. (11)) for different d values, and we report the
subsequent node probabilities (P[φ j |φ i ]) in Fig. 5b for the
case of d = 4. In Fig. 5a, we can see that the skip-gram
scheme embeds the node features better and better as the
training process continues, and the finally embedded features
of the 5 nodes for the case of d = 4, are able to capture the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

Fig. 3.

A representative evolution process of Z (s1 , a1 ).

Fig. 4.

Simple Test Network for Sanity Check.

12207

Fig. 6. The learning process of FPN-QVN (The ‘true’ CDF is achieved
through the Monte Carlo sampling method).

Fig. 5. Node embedding process of skip-gram. Fig. 5a shows the evolution
process of the skip-gram scheme for different d values, and Fig. 5b shows
the predicted subsequent node probabilities with underlined values indicating
the next node with the highest probability for the use case of d = 4.

Fig. 7. The learning process of GE-DDRL in SFN with real travel-time
statistics (The ‘true’ CDF is achieved through the Monte Carlo sampling
method).

topological relationship of the test network, as evidenced by
the predicted subsequent node in Fig. 5b.
4) The Learning Process of FPN and QVN: The details
of FPN and QVN are configured as follows: (1) FPN is a
feed-forward neural network with 128 hidden nodes, with
rectified linear activation function (ReLU); the learning rate
α f = 1e − 3, and the number of quantiles N = 128;
(2) QVN is a four-layer deep neural network with both hidden
layers containing 128 hidden nodes; ReLU is the activation
function, and the learning rate αq = 1e − 3. We present
the evolution process of the FPN-QVN estimated cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of Z (s, a), together with the true
CDF obtained from Monte Carlo sampling, in Fig. 6. In the
figure, we can see that FPN and QVN functions cooperatively
to improve the estimated CDF towards the true CDF. Comparing Fig. 6b with Fig. 6c (the ‘true’ CDF), we can see that
the trained FPN-QVN approximates the true CDF with good
accuracy.

travel time of all the edges in SFN. We select the OD pair
as (1, 15), and the underlying routing policy is the least
expected time (LET) policy. With the Monte Carlo sampling
method, we are able to estimate the ‘true’ total travel time
distribution whose cumulative distribution function (CDF) is
visualized in Fig. 7c. With GE-DDRL, the estimated CDF of
the routing policy’s travel-time distribution at the 20th episode
and the 2000th episode are visualized in Fig. 7a and Fig. 7b,
respectively. From Fig. 7, we can visably see that GE-DDRL’s
CDF estimation gradually approaches the true CDF, which is
obtained with the Monte Carlo method.

B. Additional Sanity Check in a Realistic Network: SFN
In the last subsection, we use a toy network to evaluate
the step-by-step computation process of tabular DRL and
how GE-DDRL gradually approximates the true distribution.
Now, we further verify the correctness of GE-DDRL with
a realistic transportation network, namely the Sioux Falls
Network (SFN), with real travel-time statistics, i.e., the mean

C. Performance and Efficiency Comparison in Six
Realistic Transportation Networks
In this subsection, we compare the performance and efficiency of GE-DDRL with state-of-the-art algorithms in six
realistic networks, namely, (1) Sioux Falls Network (SFN),
(2) Eastern Massachusetts (EM), (3) Anaheim Network (AN),
(4) Barcelona Network (BN), (5) Chengdu Network (CN), and
(6) Minnesota Road Network (MN). The network details, i.e.,
the number of nodes and the number of edges, are presented
in Table V.
The edges’ mean travel times (µi j ) of the first four transportation networks (SFN, EM, AN and BN) are publicly
available [63], and we follow the same method as proposed
in [17] to generate the standard deviation value of each edge

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

TABLE V
T EST N ETWORK S UMMARY

in the network. Specifically, we set σi j = Uniform(0, κ)µi j ,
where κ = 0.3. With µi j and σi j available, and assuming that
the travel time follows the truncated Gaussian distribution,
one is able to obtain as many samples as required for GEDDRL and the related benchmark algorithms. The Minnesota
dataset [65] is a widely accepted dataset in the field of graph
representation [66], [67] and graph embedding [68], [69]
research. Since it does not contain the travel-time information,
we randomly assigned the travel time of each road segment.
For Chengdu Network, the travel-time samples for each edge
are publicly available at [64].
Since GE-DDRL serves as a universal solution to the
RSP problem, we evaluate its performance and efficiency
with respect to all the three aforementioned RSP objectives,
i.e., (1) SOTA, (2) mean-std and (3) α-reliable, and make
comparisons with the respective group of benchmark algorithms. Here, we wish to point out that GE-DDRL targets
the independent and stationary travel-time distribution use
case, while a few benchmark algorithms are considering more
complex use cases. For example, decreasing order-of-time
(DOT) [23] considers the time-varying use case, and Gaussian
process path planner (GP3) [9] targets the spatially correlated
travel time. Therefore, in implementation, we trim down the
related algorithm to fit with the simpler (independent and
stationary) use case. For example, for DOT [23], we simply
discretize the time horizon while travel times are the same over
different time intervals. In this paper, the related algorithms’
efficiency comparison is just for the independent and stationary
travel-time use case, and in the meanwhile, we acknowledge
that most benchmark algorithms are having a more complex
setting, e.g., spatially correlated and/or time-varying traveltime use cases.
The parameter configuration of each RSP problem’s objective is set up as follows: (1) for the SOTA objective, we set
three types of path planning budget T for evaluation, namely,
tight budget: T = 0.975 × t LET , where t LET refers to the
expected travel time of the corresponding LET path, exact
budget: T = tLET , and loose budget: T = 1.025 × t LET ;
(2) for the α-reliable shortest path objective, we choose three
representative α values, namely, risk-averse: α = 0.9, riskneutral: α = 0.5 and risk-seeking: α = 0.1; (3) for the
mean-std objective, we choose three representative ζ values5
as follows: ζ = {1, 10, 40}. The number of evaluating OD
pairs is set up as follows: (1) EM and AN, we randomly
choose 50 OD pairs, (2) for SFN, due to its small network
size, we randomly choose 5 OD pairs, and report the average
performance metric.
5 The selection falls in the range of ζ values used in [7].

Fig. 8.

Performance and efficiency comparison for SOTA RSP.

Note that in order to compare the solution quality of each
algorithm to each RSP problem in a unified perspective,
we introduce the notion of optimality index (Opt) as the
algorithm’s performance metric. For the SOTA RSP problem,
Opt is calculated as:
Opt =

f alg − f LET
× 100%,
f LET

(19)

and for the mean-std shortest path and the α-reliable shortest
path, Opt is calculated as:
Opt = −

f alg − f LET
× 100%.
f LET

(20)

In both Eq. (19) and Eq. (20), f alg refers to the evaluating
algorithm’s average resulting RSP objective value, e.g., for
SOTA, f alg refers to the ego algorithm’s average stochastic
on-time arrival probability; for mean-std, f alg refers to the
ego algorithm’s average mean-std combination value. While
f LET refers to the LET path’s corresponding average RSP
objective value, e.g., for SOTA, f LET refers to the LET path’s
average stochastic on-time arrival probability. The reason that
we flip the sign between Eq. (19) and Eq. (20) is that for
SOTA, the objective is to maximize the objective value, while
for the other two RSP problems, the objective is to minimize
the corresponding objective values. Through flipping the sign
in Eq. (19) and Eq. (20), the algorithm’s Opt value is always
the larger the better, and it refers to the performance increase
percentage with respect to the LET path, which serves as
the baseline performance indicator. Here, all of the evaluated
RSP objectives are essentially probabilistic terms, i.e., SOTA,
α-quantile value, mean and standard deviation combination.
In the performance evaluation phase, we use the samplingbased method to evaluate the corresponding probabilistic item
values. We re-run each evaluating algorithm for 500 times,
and use the corresponding statistics as the estimate for the
probabilistic item value. For example, for SOTA, we use the
percentage of on-time arrival samples over the total samples as
the estimate. For α-quantile values, we evaluate the α-quantile
statistic based on the collected samples, and use it as the
estimated value.
1) SOTA RSP Performance Comparison and Analysis:
Fig. 8a reports the performance comparison of GE-DDRL with
related benchmark algorithms, i.e., PLM, ILP, DOT, OS-MIP
and PA. In the figure, we can see that (1) all the algorithms are
able to achieve a performance increase with respect to the LET
path’s SOTA performance; (2) all the algorithms are having the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

12209

TABLE VI
GE-DDRL’ S O FFLINE T RAINING T IME S UMMARY

largest performance increase percentage with respect to LET’s
SOTA value in AN when compared with SFN and EM, in that
AN offers a wide range of path selections and thus leads
to better path planning performance; (3) GE-DDRL always
rank top two when compared with state of the arts across all
the testing networks, and the performance difference between
GE-DDRL’s performance and the best algorithm’s performance is barely discernible, e.g., always below 1%.
Additionally, since one of GE-DDRL’s advantages over
state of the arts is that its online decision making process is
fast and scale-free with the size of the transportation network,
we evaluate and report the average online decision-making
time6 of all the algorithms in Fig 8b.
In the figure, we can see that GE-DDRL’s online decisionmaking time is at least an order-of-magnitude less than the
planning time of state of the arts,7 and it does not grow as
the network size increases. Note that (1) since GE-DDRL’s
decision making time is too small, we report the log value of
the actual decision making/planning time in Fig. 8b; (2) the
fast decision making feature of GE-DDRL is at the expense
of GE-DDRL’s offline training process, which consists of the
node feature embedding with skip-gram, and the joint training
of FPN-QVN for RSP planning. GE-DDRL’s offline training
time depends on the total number of training episodes, and
the specific configuration of the deep neural networks, and
the size of the underlying transportation networks. We report
GE-DDRL’s offline training time for the SOTA problem in
Table VI. In the table, we can see that the offline training
time of GE-DDRL grows with the size of the transportation
network, and it takes more than one full day (24 hours) for
the last two networks, i.e., CN and MN, to reach the ‘up-tostandard’ and ‘all-to-all’ navigation solution.
2) Mean-Std Shortest Path and α-Reliable Shortest Path
Performance Comparison and Analysis: Fig. 9 and Fig. 10
report the performance and efficiency comparisons of GEDDRL with state of the arts for the mean-std shortest path and
α-reliable shortest path respectively. In both figures, similar
trends can be observed: (1) GE-DDRL performs equivalently
well with the respective group of state of the arts, see
Fig. 9a and Fig. 10a; (2) GE-DDRL’s decision making time is
6 Here, the online decision-making time of an algorithm is calculated as
the total computational time it takes to execute a given optimal policy from
origin to destination. For path-based RSP planner, it refers to the one-shot
planning time, and for policy-based planner, it refers to the total computation
time required to execute a policy. The same rule applies to the other two RSP
problems.
7 Here, ‘an order of magnitude less’, means that GE-DDRL is 10 times
faster than all the other algorithms, i.e., the log value of GE-DDRL’s decisionmaking time is less than all the other algorithms’ log value of decision making
time by 1 full unit in Fig. 8b.

Fig. 9.
Performance and efficiency comparison for the mean standard
deviation shortest path problem.

Fig. 10. Performance and efficiency comparison for the α-reliable shortest
path problem.

significantly less than all of its counterparts, see Fig. 9b and
Fig. 10b.
3) Summary: In this subsection, we conduct the performance and efficiency comparison of GE-DDRL with the
corresponding group of state of the arts for all the three RSP
problems. GE-DDRL essentially provides an approximated
solution to the RSP problem, in that (1) the estimation of the
routing policy’s travel time through deep distributional reinforcement learning, and the node embedding process (through
skip-gram) brings in another layer of approximation. Thus,
the yielded RSP solution, though generic for a variety of
RSP objectives, is an approximate one instead of an exact
one. Therefore, when compared with the baseline algorithms,
especially the exact solutions, e.g., iterative labelling approach
(ILA) proposed by Khani and Boyles [7], GE-DDRL does
not have the superior performance as shown in Fig. 9a.
Nevertheless, the comparative results (Fig. 8a to Fig. 10a)
indicate that GE-DDRL is able to output ‘up-to-standard’
performance when compared with baseline algorithms, and
in the meanwhile makes the online decisions an order of
magnitude faster than baseline algorithms.
In a nutshell, GE-DDRL offers a model-free and fast
solution to a variety of RSP objectives, with ‘up-to-standard’
but not always the best performance. Therefore, users may
select the corresponding specific algorithm if they have a wellgauged model, and allow enough computation time for the
algorithm to achieve the final solution. While for GE-DDRL,
its advantage is (1) it offers a generic form of travel-time
distribution expression, and hence it applies to a variety of
RSP problems, and even applicable to a completely new RSP
objective which has not been considered before; (2) it yields
the solution very fast, in that the well-trained GE-DDRL only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 11. Performance for the Minimal Expected Delay Problem. Note that
the Y-axis is the averaged normalized expected delay with respect the the
corresponding OD pairs LET time. In this way, the performance indicator is
meaningful, i.e., the smaller the better.

forward propagates the deep neural network for distribution
estimation, which typically reacts in less than one second,
especially when we compress the node representation into a
fixed d-dimensional vector.

Fig. 12. Performance for the Constrained RSP Problem. We indicate both the
on-time ‘arrival’ probability and the ‘survival’ probability, i.e., the probability
that the electric vehicle consumes less than the electricity consumption
threshold.
TABLE VII
M ULTI -O BJECTIVE RSP P ROBLEM

D. Performance Evaluation for the Three New RSP Problems
In the last subsection, we compare the performance and
efficiency of GE-DDRL with state of the arts for the three
canonical RSP problems, and show that GE-DDRL is able
to achieve the ‘up-to-standard’ performance with very small
online decision-making time. In this subsection, we will
demonstrate the ‘universality’ characteristic of GE-DDRL by
applying it to three new RSP problems, which have not
been studied extensively in the RSP domain over the past
two decades. The three new RSP problems are (1) minimal
expected delay problem: minimize the delay time expected
if it happens; (2) constrained RSP problem: SOTA with
α-reliable constraints on total electricity consumption;
(3) multi-objective RSP: double α-reliable shortest path problem. The OD pair selection scheme and the travel-time sampling method follow exactly what the last subsection sets up.
For the minimal expected delay problem, we set the path
planning budget T ∈ {0.985, 1, 1.015} × t LET , and compare
the performance of GE-DDRL with the LET path. Fig. 11
shows the comparative results of GE-DDRL with the LET
routing policy for the three configurations, across the six
transportation networks. In the figure, we can observe that
for both the difficult task (T = 0.985 × t LET and the easy
task (T = 1.015 × t LET ), GE-DDRL is able to reach a better
solution than LET does. For the medium task (T = 1 × t LET ),
the two policies perform equally well, in that we conjecture
that the optimal solution is exactly to follow the LET path in
that case.
For the constrained RSP problem, we set up the specific
problem as follows: (1) the navigation objective is to arrive
at the destination with maximal on-time arrival probability
(path planning budget is T ); (2) the constraint is that the total
electricity consumption is less than the pre-defined budget
(T1 ) with a probability of α. We set T = t LET , and T1 =
0.985×eLET , where eLET refers to the expected total electricity
consumption suppose that the vehicle takes the LET path.
We vary α ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6}, and evaluate the performance of
GE-DDRL, to see whether GE-DDRL is able to take advantage
of different α values for better routing policy generation.
Fig. 12 shows the performance of GE-DDRL for different
values of α across the six realistic transportation networks.

In the figure, we can see that as we increase α, GE-DDRL
becomes more conservative, and results in a lower SOTA
performance, which is reasonable, in that the larger α value
should lead to safer in terms of electricity consumption but
more conservative path.
Next, we evaluate GE-DDRL’s performance for a multiobjective RSP problem, where the objective is to minimize
both α1 -quantile travel time and α2 -quantile travel time. We set
α1 = 0.9, and α2 = 0.5, and evaluate the performance
of GE-DDRL in Chengdu Network (CN), in that only CN
has publicly available real travel-time samples and distance
measurements and is large enough to offer a wide range of
policy/path selections. With different preference vectors of
λ1 and λ2 , GE-DDRL is able to reach a set of Pareto optimal
solutions. We select 3 representative OD pairs, namely short
OD (distance less than 5km), medium OD (distance between
5km and 10km), and long OD (distance greater than 10km).
Table VII presents the Pareto optimal path set for different
types of OD pairs. In the table, we can see that the long OD
pair tends to have more Pareto optimal paths than short and
medium OD pairs.
E. Generalization to Unforeseen Destinations of GE-DDRL
In the last subsection, we have shown that GE-DDRL
serves as a universal solution to all the RSP problems and is
scale-free to the size of the transportation network. Besides
being ‘universal’ and ‘scale-free’, GE-DDRL has another
unique characteristic, namely, ‘generalizable’ to unforeseen
destination nodes. It means that we train the GE-DDRL
with one destination node, but during deployment, we feed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

12211

TABLE VIII
GE-DDRL’ S G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE IN SFN

use case to spatially correlated and time-varying transportation networks. Currently, GE-DDRL can only be applied to
the independent and stationary use case, and we intend to
use multi-step or even λ-step return as the distributional
update target, which alleviates the independent travel-time
requirements.

another destination node’s embedded features into the GEDDRL framework, and GE-DDRL is still able to output a
reasonable RSP solution. Since almost all state-of-the-art RSP
solutions are treating destination nodes as distinct ones, and
thus, to the best of our knowledge, are unable to offer a
‘generalizable’ solution to unforeseen destination nodes.8
We showcase the generalization ability of GE-DDRL in
this subsection. Specifically, we randomly select 50 OD pairs,
named as training OD pairs, from the Sioux Falls Network,
and train the whole GE-DDRL framework. Then, with the
final skip-gram embedded node features and the parameterized
FPN-QVN module, we feed GE-DDRL with another set
of 50 randomly generated OD pairs, named as testing OD
pairs, and directly evaluate the performance of GE-DDRL.
Table VIII shows the performance comparison Opt value in
Eq. (19) and Eq. (20) of the average performance between the
50 training OD pairs and the 50 testing OD pairs, for all the
three RSP problems. In the table, we can see that GE-DDRL
is still able to output a reasonably good RSP solution (with
positive Opt values) for the unforeseen destination nodes.

A PPENDIX A
P ROOF OF C ONVERGENCE FOR GE-DDRL

VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper presents graph embedding and deep distributional reinforcement learning (GE-DDRL) as a universal and
scale-free solution to the reliable shortest path (RSP) problem.
GE-DDRL uses one of the prevalent graph embedding techniques, i.e., skip-gram, to compress the distinct nodes into
d-dimensional real-valued vectors and then develops a deep
distributional reinforcement learning method, which estimates
and hence optimizes the full value distribution of a given
routing policy. We test the correctness of GE-DDRL’s each
functional module with a simple yet illustrative network,
compare GE-DDRL’s performance with 15 state-of-the-art
RSP solutions (separated into three groups) in a range of
transportation networks with satisfying results, and showcase
GE-DDRL’s unique characteristic, i.e., being generalizable to
unforeseen destination nodes in the experiments section.
In the future, we would like to test GE-DDRL’s performance
in large-scale metropolitan transportation networks with real
traffic data, and enhance GE-DDRL’s stable behavior during
learning. Another aspect of improving GE-DDRL is to add
the nodes’ contextual information, e.g., local, arterial or highway, as well as the latitude-longitude information into the
graph embedding process, which may help with better node
embedding. Additionally, we are keen to extend GE-DDRL’s
8 Here, an algorithm, being ‘generalizable’ to unforeseen destination nodes,
means that the algorithm does not need to re-plan or retrain itself, and is
still able to output a reasonably good RSP solution. When supplied with a
new destination node, almost all state-of-the-art RSP algorithms need the replanning process to yield an RSP solution.

In this section, we briefly sketch the convergence proof
process of GE-DDRL. In classical value-based reinforcement learning, we need to calculate the optimal value of
Q to determine the optimal policy. The Bellman operator
in classical value-based reinforcement learning is known to
be γ -contraction, i.e., for any Q, the following inequality is
satisfied:
dist(T Q 1 , T Q 2 ) ≤ γ dist(Q 1 , Q 2 ),
where 0 < γ ≤ 1 is the discount factor. In classical
reinforcement learning, the definition of dist is the infinity
norm, i.e., dist(Q 1 , Q 2 ) := ||Q 1 −Q 2 ||∞ . However, in order to
evaluate the distance between two distance, the 1-Wasserstein
distance metric is used to as the dist to help with the training
of neural network.
In FQF, the distributional Bellman update operator is
expressed as a projection onto a parameterized quantile distribution. The operator aims to project an arbitrary distribution
Z onto Z Q (Z is a space of distribution), i.e.,
5W1 Z := argmin Z θ ∈ Z Q (Z , Z θ ),
N Z τi
X
W1 (Z , Z θ ) =
|FY−1 (ω) − θi |dω
i=1

τi −1

where θi refers to the supports of Z θ , and 5W1 is the
quantile projection used as distributional Bellman operator.
Now, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 1: For any two distributions Z 1 , Z 2 for an
MDP with finite state and action space,
d̄∞ (5W1 T Z 1 , 5W1 T Z 2 ) ≤ γ d̄∞ (Z 1 , Z 2 )
The proof of Proposition 1 needs the following two Lemmas
whose proofs are provided in [55]:
Lemma 1: Consider an MDP with countable state and
action spaces, and let Z , Y be the value distributions such
that each state-action distribution Z (x, a), Y (x, a) is given by
a single column. Consider the particular case where rewards
are identically 0 and γ = 1, and let τ ∈ [0, 1]. Denote by 5τ
the projection operator which maps a probability distribution
onto a column delta located at its τ th quantile. Then
d̄∞ (5τ T Z , 5τ T Y ) ≤ γ d̄∞ (Z , Y )
Lemma 2: For any two probability distributions v1 , v2 ,
and the Wasserstein projection operator 5W1 that projects
distributions onto the support of size n, we have that
d̄∞ (5W1 v1 , 5W1 v2 ) = max |Fv−1
(
1
i=1,...,n

2i − 1
2i − 1
) − Fv−1
(
)|
2
2n
2n

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

(1) Case 1: γ = 1, since the operator T π is a γ -contraction
in d̄∞ , it is proved;
(2) Case 2: r ≡ 0, we know that the Wasserstein distances
are constant in a translation of the supports of distributions,
so it is proved;
(3) Case 3: every distribution is composed of one single column.
solve this case with Lemma
We denote Z (s, a) =
P N 1.
P N We
1
1
δ
)
and
Y
(s,
a)
=
δ
θ
(s,a)
k=1 N φk (s,a) ). The (s, a) is
k=1 N k
a state-action pair, and (s ′ , a ′ ) is able to access all state-action
pairs. Now, we set pi as the probability of transitioning from
(s ′ , a ′ ) to (s, a), and a new MDP is constructed for the MDP
where all distributions are given by a single column. Further,
we take the (s ′ , a ′ ), and the MDP can guarantee that the (s ′ , a ′ )
˜j ˜j
˜j ˜j
transitions to (si , ai ), and the probability of reaching (si , ai )
is pi /n(i is all the next state of s, j = [1, . . . , N ]). We define
new distributions Z̃ , Ỹ , as follows:
˜j ˜j
Z̃ (si , ai ) = δθ j (si ,ai )
˜j ˜j
Ỹ (si , ai ) = δφ j (si ,ai )
With Lemma 2, the d∞ distance between the 1-Wasserstein
projections of two distributions is the max operation over the
difference of a certain set of quantiles, we apply Lemma 1 to
obtain the following:
d∞ (5W1 (T Z̃ )(s ′ , a ′ ), 5W1 (T Ỹ )(s ′ , a ′ ))
≤ sup |θ j (si , ai ) − φ j (si , ai )|
= sup d∞ (Z (si , ai ), Y (si , ai ))

(21)

Then, we perform a transition:
d∞ (5W1 (T Z̃ )(s ′ , a ′ ), 5W1 (T Ỹ )(s ′ , a ′ ))
= d∞ (5W1 (T Z )(s ′ , a ′ ), 5W1 (T Y )(s ′ , a ′ )).

(22)

Combining the inequality equation in Eq. (22), we get:
d∞ (5W1 (T Z̃ )(s ′ , a ′ ), 5W1 (T Ỹ )(s ′ , a ′ ))
≤ sup |Z (si , ai ) − Y (si , ai )|.

(23)

Taking the maximum over the initial state (s ′ , a ′ ) yields the
result.
A PPENDIX B
D ERIVATION P ROCESS OF FPN-QVN
In this section, we present the detailed mathematical derivation process of FPN-QVN as a scale-free solution to the
RSP problem. The key idea of FPN-QVN is to minimize
the Wasserstein distance between the approximated value
distribution
the true one, which is given by W1 (Z , θ, τ ) =
P N R τi and
−1
|F
i=1 τi−1
Z (t) − θi | dt. τ is proposed by the fraction
proposal network (FPN), and the Wasserstein distance is with
respect to the loss function of FPN. In this way, the weight of
W1
FPN is updated through ∂∂τ
.
When the location of quantiles, τ , are fixed, the quantile
value network (QVN) will optimize the corresponding quantile
value, i.e., θ . FPN-QVN combines the quantile regression and
distributional Bellman update based on the given τ to train the

network. QVN is trained with the Huber quantile regression
loss as follows:
L(δi j )
ρτκ (δi j ) = |τ − 1{δi j ≤ 0}|
,
κ

1

 δi2j ,
if|δi j | ≤ κ
,
Lκ (δi j ) = 2
1

 κ(|δi j | − κ), otherwise
2
where κ is the threshold value, and δi j is the weighted temporal
difference (TD) error between the two probabilities, δi j = r +
γ θi (s ′ , a ′ ) − θ j (s, a). 1{statement} is the indicator function,
which returns 1 if the statement is true, and returns 0 if the
statement is false.
the loss function of QVN is given
PFinally,
N PN
by, L(s, a) = N1 i=1
j=1 ρκ (δi j ), and the weight of QVN
is updated with ∇L.

CDF
DDRL
DOT
DP
DRL
FPN
GCN
GE
GE-DDRL
GP
GP3
GPI
ITS
LET
MDP
MF
MP
NLP
OD
QVN
RSP
SA
SFN
SOTA
VaR

L IST OF ACRONYMS
Cumulative distribution function.
Deep distributional reinforcement learning.
Decreasing order-of-time.
Dynamic programming.
Distributional reinforcement learning.
Fraction proposal network.
Graph convolutional network.
Graph embedding.
Graph embedding and deep distributional reinforcement Learning.
Genetic programming.
Gaussian process path planner.
Generalized policy iteration.
Intelligent transportation system.
Least expected time.
Markov decision process.
Matrix factorization.
Mathematical programming.
Natural language processing.
Origin-destination.
Quantile value network.
Reliable shortest path.
Successive approximation.
Sioux Falls Network.
Stochastic on-time arrival.
Value-at-risk.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the Editor-in-Chief,
an Associate Editor, and the three anonymous reviewers for
their invaluable comments and suggestions, which are quite
constructive in improving the manuscript’s quality.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Zhang, Y. Hsueh, W. Lee, and Y. Jhang, “Efficient cache-supported
path planning on roads,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 951–964, Apr. 2016.
[2] Y. Ge, H. Li, and A. Tuzhilin, “Route recommendations for intelligent
transportation services,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 1169–1182, Mar. 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: GE-DDRL FOR RELIABLE SHORTEST PATH: A UNIVERSAL AND SCALE FREE SOLUTION

[3] S. Dabiri, C. Lu, K. Heaslip, and C. K. Reddy, “Semi-supervised
deep learning approach for transportation mode identification using
GPS trajectory data,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 1010–1023, May 2020.
[4] Y. Li et al., “Top-k vehicle matching in social ridesharing: A priceaware approach,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 1251–1263, Mar. 2021.
[5] W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Z. Shang, and J. X. Yu, “To meet or not to meet:
Finding the shortest paths in road networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 772–785, Apr. 2018.
[6] T. Xing and X. Zhou, “Finding the most reliable path with and without
link travel time correlation: A Lagrangian substitution based approach,”
Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1660–1679, Dec. 2011.
[7] A. Khani and S. D. Boyles, “An exact algorithm for the mean–standard
deviation shortest path problem,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 81,
pp. 252–266, Nov. 2015.
[8] H. Guo, X. Hou, and Q. Peng, “CTD: Cascaded temporal difference
learning for the mean-standard deviation shortest path problem,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10868–10886, Aug. 2022.
[9] H. Guo, X. Hou, Z. Cao, and J. Zhang, “GP3: Gaussian process path
planning for reliable shortest path in transportation networks,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11575–11590, Aug. 2022.
[10] H. Frank, “Shortest paths in probabilistic graphs,” Oper. Res., vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 583–599, Aug. 1969.
[11] A. Chen and Z. Ji, “Path finding under uncertainty,” J. Adv. Transp.,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 19–37, Sep. 2005.
[12] T. Uchida and Y. Iida, “Risk assignment: A new traffic assignment model
considering the risk of travel time variation,” Transp. Traffic Theory,
vol. 10, pp. 89–105, Jan. 1993.
[13] R. A. Sivakumar and R. Batta, “The variance-constrained shortest path
problem,” Transp. Sci., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 309–316, Nov. 1994.
[14] H. Hu and R. Sotirov, “Special cases of the quadratic shortest path
problem,” J. Combinat. Optim., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 754–777, Apr. 2018.
[15] Q. Tu, L. Cheng, T. Yuan, Y. Cheng, and M. Li, “The constrained reliable
shortest path problem for electric vehicles in the urban transportation
network,” J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 261, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 121130.
[16] Y. Zhang, Z.-J. Max Shen, and S. Song, “Lagrangian relaxation for the
reliable shortest path problem with correlated link travel times,” Transp.
Res. B, Methodol., vol. 104, pp. 501–521, Oct. 2017.
[17] Y. Zhang and A. Khani, “An algorithm for reliable shortest path problem
with travel time correlations,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 121,
pp. 92–113, Mar. 2019.
[18] X. Hou, H. Guo, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive reliable shortest path in
Gaussian process regulated environments,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2020, pp. 6819–6825.
[19] Y. M. Nie and X. Wu, “Reliable a priori shortest path problem with
limited spatial and temporal dependencies,” in Transportation and Traffic
Theory 2009: Golden Jubilee. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2009,
pp. 169–195.
[20] A. A. Agafonov, V. V. Myasnikov, and A. I. Maksimov, “Approximation
of the road segments travel time using Levy distributions in the reliable
shortest path problem,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 1368, no. 3, Nov. 2019,
Art. no. 032008.
[21] P. Chen, R. Tong, B. Yu, and Y. Wang, “Reliable shortest path finding
in stochastic time-dependent road network with spatial–temporal link
correlations: A case study from Beijing,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 147,
Jun. 2020, Art. no. 113192.
[22] L. Shen, H. Shao, L. Zhang, and J. Zhao, “The global optimal algorithm
of reliable path finding problem based on backtracking method,” Math.
Problems Eng., vol. 2017, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2017.
[23] A. Arun Prakash, “Algorithms for most reliable routes on stochastic
and time-dependent networks,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 138,
pp. 202–220, Aug. 2020.
[24] S. Gao and I. Chabini, “Optimal routing policy problems in stochastic
time-dependent networks,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 40, no. 2,
pp. 93–122, Feb. 2006.
[25] Y. Nie and X. Wu, “Shortest path problem considering on-time arrival
probability,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 597–613,
Jul. 2009.
[26] L. Yang and X. Zhou, “Optimizing on-time arrival probability and
percentile travel time for elementary path finding in time-dependent
transportation networks: Linear mixed integer programming reformulations,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 96, pp. 68–91, Feb. 2017.

12213

[27] Y. Liu, S. Blandin, and S. Samaranayake, “Stochastic on-time arrival
problem in transit networks,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 119,
pp. 122–138, Jan. 2019.
[28] Y. Fan, R. Kalaba, and J. Moore, “Arriving on time,” J. Optim. Theory
Appl., vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 497–513, 2005.
[29] B. Y. Chen, C. Shi, J. Zhang, W. H. K. Lam, Q. Li, and S. Xiang, “Most
reliable path-finding algorithm for maximizing on-time arrival probability,” Transportmetrica B: Transp. Dyn., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 248–264,
Jul. 2017.
[30] F. Manseur, N. Farhi, C. Nguyen Van Phu, H. Haj-Salem, and
J.-P. Lebacque, “Robust routing, its price, and the tradeoff between
routing robustness and travel time reliability in road networks,” Eur.
J. Oper. Res., vol. 285, no. 1, pp. 159–171, Aug. 2020.
[31] B. Y. Chen, W. H. K. Lam, and Q. Li, “Efficient solution algorithm
for finding spatially dependent reliable shortest path in road networks,”
J. Adv. Transp., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1413–1431, Nov. 2016.
[32] D. Corredor-Montenegro, N. Cabrera, R. Akhavan-Tabatabaei, and
A. L. Medaglia, “On the shortest α-reliable path problem,” J. Spanish
Soc. Statist. Oper. Res., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 287–318, 2021.
[33] Y. Fan and Y. Nie, “Optimal routing for maximizing the travel time reliability,” Netw. Spatial Econ., vol. 6, nos. 3–4, pp. 333–344, Sep. 2006.
[34] Y. Nie and Y. Fan, “Arriving-on-Time problem: Discrete algorithm
that ensures convergence,” Transp. Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board,
vol. 1964, no. 1, pp. 193–200, Jan. 2006.
[35] Z. Cao, H. Guo, J. Zhang, D. Niyato, and U. Fastenrath, “Finding
the shortest path in stochastic vehicle routing: A cardinality minimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 6,
pp. 1688–1702, Jun. 2016.
[36] Z. Cao, H. Guo, J. Zhang, D. Niyato, and U. Fastenrath, “Improving the
efficiency of stochastic vehicle routing: A partial Lagrange multiplier
method,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3993–4005,
Jun. 2016.
[37] Z. Cao et al., “An accurate solution to the cardinality-based punctuality
problem,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 78–91,
Winter 2020.
[38] W. Zeng, T. Miwa, Y. Wakita, and T. Morikawa, “Application of
Lagrangian relaxation approach to α-reliable path finding in stochastic
networks with correlated link travel times,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 56, pp. 309–334, Jul. 2015.
[39] M. Rajabi-Bahaabadi, A. Shariat-Mohaymany, M. Babaei, and
C. W. Ahn, “Multi-objective path finding in stochastic time-dependent
road networks using non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 5056–5064, Jul. 2015.
[40] Z. Ji, Y. S. Kim, and A. Chen, “Multi-objective α-reliable path finding in
stochastic networks with correlated link costs: A simulation-based multiobjective genetic algorithm approach (SMOGA),” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1515–1528, Mar. 2011.
[41] P. Chen, R. Tong, G. Lu, and Y. Wang, “The α-reliable path problem
in stochastic road networks with link correlations: A moment-matchingbased path finding algorithm,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 110, pp. 20–32,
Nov. 2018.
[42] F. Qian et al., “Unsupervised seismic footprint removal with physical
prior augmented deep autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5910920.
[43] F. Qian, Y. He, Y. Yue, Y. Zhou, B. Wu, and G. Hu, “Improved
low-rank tensor approximation for seismic random plus footprint
noise suppression,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5903519.
[44] H. Cai, V. W. Zheng, and K. C. Chang, “A comprehensive survey of
graph embedding: Problems, techniques, and applications,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1616–1637, Sep. 2018.
[45] S. Cao, W. Lu, and Q. Xu, “GraRep: Learning graph representations
with global structural information,” in Proc. 24th ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2015, pp. 891–900.
[46] D. Cai, X. He, and J. Han, “Spectral regression: A unified subspace
learning framework for content-based image retrieval,” in Proc. 15th
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Sep. 2007, pp. 403–412.
[47] S. Xiang, F. Nie, C. Zhang, and C. Zhang, “Nonlinear dimensionality
reduction with local spline embedding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1285–1298, Sep. 2009.
[48] M. Balasubramanian and E. L. Schwartz, “The isomap algorithm and
topological stability,” Science, vol. 295, no. 5552, p. 7, 2002.
[49] R. Jiang, W. Fu, L. Wen, S. Hao, and R. Hong, “Dimensionality reduction on anchorgraph with an efficient locality preserving projection,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 187, pp. 109–118, Apr. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

[50] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781.
[51] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1609.02907.
[52] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” 2016,
arXiv:1611.07308.
[53] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
[54] M. G. Bellemare, W. Dabney, and R. Munos, “A distributional perspective on reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML),
2017, pp. 449–458.
[55] W. Dabney, M. Rowland, M. G. Bellemare, and R. Munos, “Distributional reinforcement learning with quantile regression,” in Proc. 32nd
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2018, pp. 2892–2899.
[56] W. Dabney, G. Ostrovski, D. Silver, and R. Munos, “Implicit quantile
networks for distributional reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2018, pp. 1096–1105.
[57] D. Yang, L. Zhao, Z. Lin, T. Qin, J. Bian, and T.-Y. Liu, “Fully parameterized quantile function for distributional reinforcement learning,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 6193–6202.
[58] R. Peyre, “Comparison between W2 distance and H−1 norm, and
localization of Wasserstein distance,” ESAIM, Control, Optim. Calculus
Variat., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1489–1501, Oct. 2018.
[59] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “Node2Vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, Aug. 2016, pp. 855–864.
[60] J. Jain, V. Bagadia, S. Manchanda, and S. Ranu, “NeuroMLR: Robust &
reliable route recommendation on road networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 1–22.
[61] D. Ouyang, L. Yuan, L. Qin, L. Chang, Y. Zhang, and X. Lin,
“Efficient shortest path index maintenance on dynamic road networks
with theoretical guarantees,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13, no. 5,
pp. 602–615, Jan. 2020.
[62] S. Dittert. (2020). Fully Parameterized Quantile Function (FQF)
and Extensions. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/BY571/FQFand-Extensions
[63] Transportation Networks for Research Core Team. Transportation Networks for Research. Accessed: Nov. 19, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/bstabler/TransportationNet works
[64] F. Guo, D. Zhang, Y. Dong, and Z. Guo, “Urban link travel speed dataset
from a megacity road network,” Sci. Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–10,
May 2019.
[65] R. A. Rossi and N. K. Ahmed, “The network data repository with
interactive graph analytics and visualization,” in Proc. AAAI, 2015,
pp. 1–25. [Online]. Available: https://networkrepository.com
[66] L. Song, Y. Zhuo, X. Qian, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “GraphR: Accelerating
graph processing using ReRAM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High
Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Feb. 2018, pp. 531–543.
[67] F. Sala, C. De Sa, A. Gu, and C. Ré, “Representation tradeoffs
for hyperbolic embeddings,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018,
pp. 4460–4469.
[68] G. H. Nguyen, J. B. Lee, R. A. Rossi, N. K. Ahmed, E. Koh, and S. Kim,
“Continuous-time dynamic network embeddings,” in Proc. Companion
Web Conf. Web Conf., 2018, pp. 969–976.
[69] J. Boaz Lee, G. Nguyen, R. A. Rossi, N. K. Ahmed, E. Koh,
and S. Kim, “Dynamic node embeddings from edge streams,” 2019,
arXiv:1904.06449.

Hongliang Guo (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in dynamic engineering and the
M.Eng. degree in dynamic control from the Beijing
Institute of Technology, China, in 2005 and 2007,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and
computer engineering from the Stevens Institute of
Technology, USA. He was an Associate Professor with the University of Electronics Science and
Technology of China, from 2016 to 2020. In 2023,
he joined Sichuan University (SCU), as an Associate
Professor. His research interests include planning
and learning under uncertainties and multi-robot search for moving targets.

Wenda Sheng received the bachelor’s degree
(Hons.) from the School of Automation Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China (UESTC), in 2020, where he is currently
pursuing the master’s degree in control science and
engineering. His research interests include distributional reinforcement learning for reliable shortest
path and reinforcement learning for safe autonomous
navigation in dynamic environments.

Yingjie Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Communication and
Information Engineering, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China (UESTC), China,
in 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor with
the College of Computer Science, Sichuan University (SCU), China, where he is also the Director
of the Institute of Network and Intelligent Systems. His current research interests include network
management, behavioral data analysis, and resource
allocation. He has served as the Local Arrangement
Chair for IEEE BMSB; the Publicity Chair for EAI MONAMI; and a TPC
Member for IEEE conferences, including IEEE Globlecom, IEEE ITSC, IEEE
HPCC, and IEEE MSN.

Yunping Chen (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the Southwest University of China, and the Ph.D. degree in geographic
information system and remote sensing from Beijing
Normal University. Currently, he is an Associate
Professor with the University of Electronics Science
and Technology of China (UESTC). His research
interests include remote sensing, geographic information systems, and mapping and localization with
multi-modal sensor information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:26:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

