©SHUTTERSTOCK.COM/DANIEL TADEVOSYAN

An Adaptive Route Guidance
Model Considering the Effect
of Traffic Signals Based on
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yunyang Shi , Ziyuan Gu *, Xun Yang , Yingdi Li, and Zixuan Chu
Are with the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Urban ITS, Jiangsu Province Collaborative Innovation
Center of Modern Urban Traffic Technologies, School of Transportation, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210096, China. E-mail: yunyang-shi@seu.edu.cn; ziyuangu@seu.edu.cn;
yangxunseu@seu.edu.cn; yingdi.li@qq.com; psxzc5@nottingham.ac.uk
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MITS.2023.3265596
Date of publication 1 May 2023; date of current version 8 May 2024.

*Corresponding author

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1939-1390/23©2023IEEE

IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

21

• MAY/JUNE 2024

Abstract—Navigation or route guidance systems are designed to provide drivers with real-time travel information
and the associated recommended routes for their trips. Classical route choice models typically rely on utility theory
to represent drivers’ route choice behavior. Such choices, however, may not be optimal from both the individual and
the system perspectives. This is simply due to the fact that drivers usually have imperfect knowledge about the timevarying traffic conditions. In this article, we explore and propose a new model-free deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) approach to solving the adaptive route guidance problem based on microsimulation. The proposed approach
consists of three interconnected algorithms, including a network edge labeling algorithm, a routing plan identification algorithm, and an adaptive route guidance algorithm. Simulation experiments on both a toy network and a realworld network of Suzhou, China, are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in terms
of guiding a single vehicle as well as multiple vehicles through complex traffic environments. Comparative results
confirm that the DRL approach outperforms the traditional shortest path method by further reducing the average
travel time in the network.

T

he Advanced Traveler Information System is a core
component of intelligent transportation applications designed to smooth traffic operation for better
urban mobility [1], [2]. Without the help of such a
global guidance system, drivers’ routing strategies can
be based only on experience or very limited information
about the neighboring traffic. The consequence is that
they are unable to actively and timely respond to traffic
congestion or road incidents so as to avoid unnecessary
travel delays [3].

Introduction
Due to the rapid development of data collection and communication technologies, we have witnessed the emergence of navigation devices or systems that are capable of
collecting and digesting real-time traffic information and
providing travelers with useful route guidance. However,
most of such route guidance is reactive and thus suboptimal in the sense that the planner is designed to calculate the shortest path with the least instantaneous travel
time upon request without considering how traffic might
evolve in the near future. To obtain the shortest path with
the least travel time experienced, adaptive routing plays a
critical role.
Studies on vehicle route choice (VRC) can be traced
back to the surveys conducted by Dijkstra [4]. Algorithms
such as the k-shortest path algorithm and the A* algorithm [5] are early solutions to the VRC problem. These
algorithms, however, are effective only in static and deterministic network settings, whereas real-world traffic
networks are inherently dynamic and stochastic. In such
stochastic and time-dependent (STD) networks, the optimality of nonadaptive VRC solvers can no longer be guaranteed. In fact, adaptive routing in STD networks requires
that the optimal route choice not be a single fixed path
but a sequential decision-making process that adapts to
the changing traffic conditions—an optimal successor
node is chosen based on the arrival time of the current

node, and further node choices are made only after they
are visited [6]. To solve the adaptive VRC problem in STD
networks, various methods were proposed over the last
few decades, including (stochastic) dynamic programming, heuristic algorithms, and agent-based simulation.
But these methods typically involve strong modeling assumptions and suffer from the curse of dimensionality and
biased estimation of parameters [7].
Recent years have witnessed an increasing application
of reinforcement learning (RL) or deep RL (DRL) as a model-free approach to solving complicated decision-making
problems [8], [9]. This tendency is arguably due to the
modeling flexibility of DRL and its learning capability via
interacting with complex environments. When applied to
solve the adaptive VRC problem in STD networks, DRL can
formulate this decision-making process as a well-defined
Markov decision process (MDP). The objective is to learn a
route planner (i.e., the policy network in DRL) so that it can
navigate a vehicle via the optimal route toward its destination and make necessary en route adjustments as per the
changing traffic conditions. To learn such a route planner,
a tailored microscopic traffic simulation model or environment [10], [11], [12] is a prerequisite so that the interaction
between the route choice and the spatial-temporal traffic
flow can be captured [13], [14].
In this article, we aim to explore the applicability of
DRL in adaptive vehicle routing based on microscopic traffic simulation. The contribution is threefold.
1) A network edge labeling algorithm and a routing plan
identification algorithm are proposed to facilitate the
implementation of DRL in a microsimulation.
2) A new DRL model with computational efficiency consideration is proposed to solve the adaptive VRC problem
in STD networks.
3) Numerical experiments in both a toy network and a
real-world network demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach in guiding a single vehicle as well as
multiple vehicles through complex traffic environments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

22

• MAY/JUNE 2024

The remainder of this article is
organized as follows. In the “Related Works” section, we provide a
In this article, we aim to explore the applicability of DRL
literature review of both classical
and RL-based route choice models.
in adaptive vehicle routing based on microscopic
The “Methodology” section elabotraffic simulation.
rates on the problem formulation
and proposes the overall methodological framework based on DRL.
ant colony algorithms an attractive representation of
Numerical experiments in both a
heuristic algorithms. The dynamic optimization routing
toy network and a real-world network of Suzhou, China,
method based on an ant adaptive algorithm was develare conducted in the “Simulation Experiments” section to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Fioped by Ding et al. and is based on a globally optimiznally, the “Conclusion” section draws conclusions and suging ant cycle of ant colony optimization and Max-Min ant
system in [23]. In addition to the research on traditional
gests future work.
traffic flow states, a multi-ant colony system was proRelated Works
posed to tackle evacuation routing problems with mixed
traffic flow in [24]. However, although these ant colony
methods have achieved promising results, they still
Classical Route Choice Models
suffer from a lack of adaptability and immediacy when
In 1959, Dijkstra proposed the famous shortest-path algoapplied to a more realistic, complex, and dynamic transrithm, which triggered the upsurge of research on routing
problems [4]. The single shortest path was extended to a set
portation system.
of alternative paths and the k-shortest-path algorithm deWith enhanced computational power and extended
data
acquisition, a group of researchers is motivated to
veloped by Eppstein [15]. Another remarkable application
model microscopic and dynamic vehicle route behaviors.
was the goal-directed search algorithm, also known as the
Through the integration of an adaptive routing agent and
A* algorithm, proposed by Hart [16]. With the advent of the
traffic simulation, the proposed model can produce timeA* algorithm over the past decades, researchers have prospace trajectories for each simulated agent and further
gressively explored and proposed many variations, reprequantify the impact on the transportation network. Nusented by geometric, heuristic [17], and landmark-based [18]
A* searches. However, real-world transportation networks
merous scholars have conducted extensive research in
are STD networks, in which the standard shortest-path almodeling drivers’ adaptive route behavior, thus explorgorithms mentioned previously couldn’t locate the optimal
ing the classical theory of random utility maximization.
path. Hall [6] first introduced dynamic programming to STD
Logit models [25] were applied to evaluate the effect of
networks for finding the least expected travel time path. The
real-time traffic information on en route behavior. Other
best route from any given node to the destination depends
extensions, like mixed logit [26] and cumulative prospect
on the arrival time at that node.
theory [27], have been broadly employed in modeling diSince then, large numbers of researchers have applied
version behavior. However, random utility maximization
stochastic dynamic programming to find the optimal path
suffers from the limitation of perfect rationality, while
in STD networks. Moreover, a stochastic dynamic programen route behaviors are generally uncertain. Conseming formulation was proposed for the dynamic routing
quently, rule-based computational process models were
of vehicles in nonstationary stochastic networks subject
explored to handle the limitation. Among numerous beto both recurrent and nonrecurrent congestion [19]. Adhavioral rules, Bayes’ rule is believed to be important
for representing decision making under uncertainty in
ditionally, to export an adaptive routing policy, dynamic
[28]. To model agents’ en route diversion behavior unprogramming with prospect theory was combined with
stochastic dominance [20]. On the other hand, dynamic
der information provision, the estimation based on naïve
programming was also utilized to derive and approximate
Bayes rules and recalibrated using a Bayesian approach
the analytical solution of the optimal routing policy for
was performed in [29].
each time interval [21].
In the past few years, heuristic algorithms have also
RL-Based Route Choice Models
been widely applied in adaptive route guidance. In a
The classic methods are all parametric adaptive routing
pioneering study, the heuristic algorithm was combined
models that are constrained by strong assumptions [30],
with the k-shortest-path algorithm to solve the dynamic
[31]. With the rapid development and outstanding achieveand stochastic shortest path problem by [22]. The high
ment of machine learning technologies, many researchcompatibility with adaptive routing problems has made
ers introduced RL into adaptive routing to overcome the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

23

• MAY/JUNE 2024

DRL. DL is adept at excavating the
internal patterns of data and always integrated with RL to achieve
Here, we consider and calculate three alternative routes at
a joint benefit. Since computation
power is becoming more affordthe departure time of each agent via a routing plan
able, the potential of using DRL to
identification algorithm.
solve transportation problems has
expanded even further. As the most
representative method of DRL, the
deep Q-learning network (DQN)
shortcomings of classical models in terms of applica[35]
has
gained
significant
achievements in transportation.
tion. RL is a kind of machine learning method for solvIn
[36],
a
DRL
routing
algorithm
that considers comprehening timing optimization decision problems that is utilized
to describe and resolve the problem that agents maxisive network information for state representation was develmize returns or achieve specific goals through learning
oped, and one-to-many network configuration for routing
strategies in their interactions with the environment. A
choices was also used. In [37], DQN was utilized to build a
behavioral selection strategy is revised to maximize the
real-time intelligent vehicle routing and navigation system
expected reward as the learning goal using environmenby formulating the task as a sequence of decisions.
In [38], a novel approach for adaptive intelligent cruise
tal reward and reinforcement signals. When the agent
guidance and vehicle resource management was presentmakes a decision, it has knowledge about the current condition of the environment and uses prior experiences to
ed. Specifically, this study proposed the utilization of a DRL
choose the best course of action. This transitions the enalgorithm to facilitate the selection of orders by guiding
vehicles to hotspots. It is noteworthy that DRL algorithmvironment to a new state. A reward or punishment signal
based navigation applications have found widespread use
is given to the agent to indicate whether the action taken
in various fields, such as aerial and ground robotics and
was good or bad.
unmanned surface vehicle technology [39], [40]. However,
The reward guidance behavior of the RL agent can be
it is observed that the utilization of such algorithms in road
viewed as “trial and error” learning toward the maximum
vehicles remains limited, thereby indicating a potential avreward. The common model of RL is the standard MDP,
where the agent interacts with the environment, progressenue for future research.
The DRL framework provides an innovative solution
ing through state transitions. Model-free RL approaches
for vehicle routing and navigation since the learning
have been popular in recent years as a solution to the
process is fully automated and does not require any laproblem of agents not knowing the model environment.
As the most classical and representative RL algorithm,
beling or guiding. Also, the agents can be automatically
Q-learning has received a number of research efforts. An
readapted to the global environment by analyzing the
RL framework was developed by Mao and Shen [7] for the
global context and saving travel time. However, most of
adaptive routing problem in an STD network. Both the onthe existing studies on DRL and route choice disregard
the elaborative modeling of simulation and the optimizaline Q-learning method for discrete state space and the offline fitted Q iteration algorithm for continuous state space
tion design of relevant algorithms for route choice. This
are considered.
article intends to optimize and improve the traffic simIn [32], the Bush–Mosteller RL scheme was introduced to
ulation system and propose a real-time en route choice
model the route choice behaviors of travelers who aim to seek
framework by integrating the route choice algorithms of
optimal travel routes that minimize their travel time. In [33],
different targets.
the effects that adaptive driver agents cause on the overall
network were analyzed when those agents share their agMethodology
gregated experience about route choice in an RL setup. In
Consider a general traffic network denoted by G = (N, E )
[34], multiagent RL was combined with car-to-infrastructure
in which N is the finite set of nodes and E 3 N # N is
communication. While vehicles communicate the travel
the set of edges. When a vehicle or agent is ready to travel
times they have experienced in nearby links, they can also
through this network with a predetermined origin-desreceive the expected travel times regarding their next postination (OD) pair (n o, n d), the alternative routes for the
trip can be identified following some rules and put into a
sible link choices.
choice set. One example of such rules is the k-shortest-path
However, a tabular format for Q-learning is inefficient
algorithm, as previously discussed. The number of alterand infeasible for many real-world problems that involve a
wide state space and action space. To mitigate the “curse of
native routes included in the choice set certainly affects
dimensionality,” deep learning (DL) is utilized as a ­function
the computational complexity of the model, especially for
approximator and integrated with RL, which contributes to
a large-scale network. Thus, the usual practice is to limit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

24

• MAY/JUNE 2024

prerequisite. Thus, the overall methodological framework
this number to a small value [41]. Once the choice set is
consists of three major components that will be respectiveformed, the goal is then to find the best routing option by
possibly combining the alternative routes within the set so
ly described in the following.
that the travel time is minimized.
Specifically, at each time step t, the agent obtains the
Network Edge Labeling Algorithm
current traffic state s t through interactions with the drivAs previously mentioned, a prerequisite to designing and
evaluating a DRL-based route guidance algorithm is to
ing environment. Whenever the agent travels onto the next
have a compatible microscopic traffic simulation environedge belonging to the current route, after which two or
more alternative routes diverge, it reevaluates all the route
ment as the testbed. Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO)
candidates based on s t and enacts a new route choice a t
is a widely used open source microscopic traffic simulafrom the action space A (i.e., the choice set). The edge that
tor that features a “remote control” interface called T
­ raCI
triggers new decision making on route choice is located
(short for Traffic Control Interface) to permit dynamic modright before the intersecting node of alternative routes so
ifications to the states of vehicles and road infrastructure
that the agent is left with enough time and space to pursue
during the simulation [43]. In recent years, numerous studroute changes if necessary. To properly guide the action
ies on vehicle routing have been conducted using SUMO as
taken by the agent, a reward rt (s t, a t) is collected from the
the simulation engine [44], [45], [46]. In light of these facts,
we choose to use SUMO in this article for establishing the
driving environment, based on which the expected cumuinteractive simulation environment.
lative reward (i.e., the least travel time for the trip in the
In the SUMO simulation setting, a traffic network is abcontext of route choice) is to be maximized via the interaction with the environment. Through such a trial-and-error
stracted and decomposed into nodes, edges (with lanes),
process, adaptive route guidance can be learned that is able
and connections. Nodes are the starting or ending points
to navigate vehicles through complex traffic environments
of edges that build connections among multiple roads (see
with time-varying congestion dynamics and occasional
Figure 1). It turns out that the nodes and edges defined
events.
in SUMO have their respective naming rules built upon
It is clear that a critical component of the previously derandomly generated numbers. Such naming rules clearly
cannot reflect the spatial relationships between different
scribed route guidance is the formation of the choice set
given the OD pair of the trip and the
departure time of the agent. Here, we
consider and calculate three alternative routes at the departure time of
Shortest-Path Algorithm Calculation Process in Typology Network
each agent via a routing plan identification algorithm. These routes
Node
form the choice set that remains unchanged throughout the trip. In parOrigin
Destination
ticular, they consist of the route with
the shortest travel distance, the route
Vehicle Route Definition in Simulation Network
with the least instantaneous travel
time, and the route with the lowest
Node
impact of traffic signals. The inclusion of the former two can be quite
Origin
Destination
easily comprehended. The reason to
Network in SUMO
include the latter is that travel delays
incurred at signalized intersections
can sometimes be a huge addition to
the travel time of the trip itself [42].
Node
To navigate the agent toward its
destination as soon as possible, a
Edge
DRL-based adaptive route guidance
algorithm is proposed, taking into account the results given by the routing
plan identification. For this approach
to work in a microscopic traffic simulation environment, a network edge FIG 1 The gap between the classic shortest-path algorithm in the topology network and the vehicle
labeling algorithm is customized as a route definition in the simulation network.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

25

• MAY/JUNE 2024

IDs are put before and after the
character @, correspond to the two
end nodes of any edge in the netIn the SUMO simulation setting, a traffic network is
work, including the one where the
starting or ending point of a vehiabstracted and decomposed into nodes, edges (with lanes),
cle is located. By doing so, one can
and connections.
readily access the spatial relationships between nodes and edges to
identify routes from shortest-path
algorithms or route choice models.
The
complete
network
edge
labeling algorithm is provided
nodes and edges. On the other hand, Dijkstra’s algorithm
in Algorithm 1.
and other variants are designed to calculate the shortest
path from node to node, but the starting and ending positions of vehicles in SUMO are defined by edges. Thus, withRouting Plan Identification Algorithm
out proper naming rules, the spatial relationships between
Once the simulation network is all set up as per the previnodes and edges in the simulation network can hardly be
ous section, we are then ready to acquire various types of
understood, which creates unnecessary difficulty for the
shortest paths from the traffic environment. The shortestapplication of route choice models in the simulation.
path problem is a typical and critical problem in combiTo customize the simulation environment so that it can
natorial optimization, which, by definition, is to find the
facilitate the implementation of the DRL-based route choice
path with the least travel distance, time, or cost from an
model, a network edge labeling algorithm is first proposed
origin to a destination in the network [47]. While most drivto explicitly characterize the spatial relationships between
ers are believed to choose the shortest path with the least
nodes and edges in the simulation network. Given that the
travel time for the trip, some may prefer a different route
network information is stored in the XML format in SUMO,
that is somewhat longer than the shortest one but bears the
the following naming rule is proposed: junction ID @ junclowest impact of traffic signals (e.g., a route that is mainly
composed of expressways or highways) [48], [49]. This is
tion ID #occurrence time. The two junctions, for which the
to avoid the possibly excessive waiting time at signalized
intersections. Knowing that the shortest path determined
at the time of departure does not necessarily remain the
Algorithm 1. Network edge labeling algorithm.
shortest one later in time due to congestion dynamics, we
provide each vehicle with an individual-specific choice set
Net ! Parse the network file
consisting of three alternative routes, namely the route
H ! Hash Table
with the shortest travel distance, the route with the least
R ! Hash Table
instantaneous travel time, and the route with the lowest
for edge in net.edges do
if edge is noninternal then
impact of traffic signals.
   raw edge ID ! edge.ID
Of the three alternative routes, the former two can now
   temp new edge ID ! edge.from@edge.to
be easily found based on the correctly labeled simulation
  if H.containsKey(temp new edge ID) then
network and any shortest-path algorithms, such as Dijk    H.set(temp new edge ID,
stra’s algorithm with distance and time being the edge
    H.get(temp new edge ID)+ 1)
weight, respectively. However, identifying the path with
  else
the lowest impact of traffic signals remains a challeng    H.insert(temp new edge D, 0)
ing task. Some studies have formulated this problem as a
  end if
special type of the shortest-path problem with time con  Occurrence ! H.get(temp new edge ID)
straints, which comprises a series of time windows used
   new edge ID ! edge.from@ edge.to#occurrence
to factor in the presence of traffic signals [50], [51]. Some
   R.set(raw edge ID, new edge ID)
end if
other studies took a different approach by introducing an
end for
edge-specific indicator and setting it to zero or one defor component in network.children do
pending on whether or not traffic signals exist [52]. This
for element in component.children do
approach certainly has limitations, one of which is that
  if element.attributes.contains(raw edge ID) then
vehicles turning right need not wait for the green light (for
   raw edge ID ! R.get(raw edge ID)
right-driving countries such as China).
  end if
Here, we propose a simple but rational probabilistic apend for
proach to identifying the route with the lowest impact of
end for
traffic signals. Whenever a vehicle reaches a signalized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

26

• MAY/JUNE 2024

intersection, the next edge to be traveled upon and the
current signal phase jointly determine the effect of the
traffic light on the vehicle. Due to the complex congestion
dynamics, such an effect in the form of travel delays cannot be exactly calculated, especially considering multiple
signalized intersections along the route. Thus, we resort
to a computationally feasible approach relying on the ratio
of the intergreen time and the cycle length associated with
each movement at signalized intersections (see Figure 2).
Such a ratio quantifies the probability of a vehicle being
interrupted by the traffic light if it arrives at the intersection in a time-random manner. Although in practice the arrival time of a vehicle at an intersection is not necessarily
independent of that at another intersection, using this ratio
largely facilitates the identification of the route with the
lowest impact of traffic signals, which is particularly the
case in a large-scale network.
The ratio of the intergreen time in one signal-controlled
node is determined by the real-time traffic signal plans,
which means it is applicable for both fixed-timing and actuated traffic signal phases. The detailed steps for identifying the route with the lowest impact of traffic signals are
provided in Algorithm 2.

Adaptive Route Guidance Algorithm
Given the route choice set, we are now ready to describe how
DRL can be applied to effectively guide vehicles through complex traffic environments so that they can reach their destinations as soon as possible. To accomplish this task, we employ
a DQN as the core of the adaptive route guidance algorithm.
As previously discussed, traditional parametric route choice
models are no longer competent at this job due to their inability to interact with and learn from the complex traffic environment, not to mention the assumptions they make that may not
necessarily hold in practice. DRL, such as the DQN, excels in
this regard as one usually need not make prior assumptions

about the model but mainly rely on the data. It is true that the
architecture of the neural network must be predefined, but
this does not limit the capability of the model in constructing a
very complex nonlinear relationship between the state space
and the action space if necessary.
To build and train the DQN, we first need to define the
state space, the action space, and the reward function for
each vehicle. The action space is straightforward and has
been defined already in the previous section as the set of
three alternative routes, A = " p 1, p 2, p 3 , . When a vehicle
travels onto the edge that requires new decision making on
the route choice, it takes an action by choosing from the
choice set (i.e., one of the three alternative routes) such that
the sequence of actions taken leads to the maximum cumulative reward considering the changing traffic conditions.
The state space defines the information, based on which the
action is made, and thus must effectively capture the factors
contributing to a better route choice. Here, we design the
state space as a combination of the estimated travel time,
the total number of vehicles, and the total length of vehicles
for the remaining part of the three alternative routes. The
latter two variables can be directly extracted from the simulation network and compensate for the former, especially
in scenarios where the travel time of a route is sensitive to
the number and types of vehicles it holds. To obtain the estimated travel time, we use the following equation:
Z le
]] , n e 2 0
ve
xe = [
(1)
] le , ne = 0
f
e
\
where v e is the average traveling speed on the edge, l e is
the length of the edge, f e is the free-flow speed (i.e., the
speed limit) of the edge, and n e is the number of vehicles on
the edge. The complete state space can then be characterized as a vector s t = ( n t1, n t2, n t3, h t1, h t2, h t3, x 1t , x 2t , x 3t ), where

w11 ...
wn1 ...
Node

Node With TL

Shortest-Path
Algorithm

wnn

Temp Node

Right Turn Edge (TL)

w=0

Left Turn/Straight Edge (TL)

w = tp /C

Simple Edge

...

...

...

w=

w1n

O

D

O

D

w=0

Node Path

FIG 2 Identifying the route with the lowest impact of traffic signals. TL: traffic light.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

27

• MAY/JUNE 2024

Algorithm 2. Get the route with the lowest impact of traffic signals.

Algorithm 2. Get the route with the lowest impact of traffic signals.
(Continued )

O

D
Input: Depart edge O and end edge D
Output: Edge path O " E 1 " g " D with least expected traffic light
1. Initialization:
1)	Road network G = (V, E ), where V refers to the set of vertices (nodes)
and E refers to the set of edges. Mark " a " b , refers to the edge from
node a to node b
2)	Vertices controlled by a traffic light V tl ! V and the green-time-rate m i
for node i ! V tl
3)	Geographical location (x i , y i ) for node i ! V
4)	Turn direction function Dir (x " y " z ) to judge the turn direction from
node x to z through node y based on the geographical location, the
result contains s (straight), r (right), and l (left)
5)	Map P (i ) and Q (i ), return the start node and end node of edge i .
P (" a " b ,) = a and Q (" a " b ,) = b
6)	Turn edge set M = Q

		
4. Assignment: Set the weight of the traffic light for each edge
1)	Initialization: W k #k | w = 0, k is the size of edge set E , w ij is the traffic
light weight for edge " i " j ,
2)	For each E i ! M :
Set traffic light weight
ij

w P (E ) Q (E ) = )

		

i

i

1 - m y D (E i ) = l, s
0
D (E i ) = r

P(O)

Q(D)
		
5.	Optimization: Get the shortest node path from the end node of the
origin edge to the start node of the destination edge
1)	Get the shortest node path L from node Q (O ) to node P (D ) with weight
matrix W and Dijkstra algorithm
P(O)

		
2.	Segmentation: Divide all the edges in the network into two connected
sub-edges
1)	For each " u " v , ! E :
separate " u " v , into two edges with temp-node t uv
		

Q(D)

" u " v , " "" u " t uv ,, " t uv " v ,,

O

V ! V + Tuv and E ! " P (E i ) " t P (E ) Q (E ) , , " t P (E ) Q (E ) " Q (E i ) ,, Tuv is
2)	
the set of temp-node
i

i

i

i

D

		

		
3.	Reconstitution: Link the subnodes connected to the node controlled by
a traffic light, delete the nodes controlled and the connecting nodes
1)	For each E i ! E :
	 If Q (E i ) ! V tl:

	   E ! E , " P (E i ) " TQ (E ) j ,, j ! P (E i ) (no U-turn)
	   M ! M , " P (E i ) " Q (E i ) " TQ (E ) j ,
i

i

V ! V \V tl
2)	
3)	For each E i ! E :
	 If P (E i ) ! V tl or Q (E i ) ! V tl:
	   E ! E \ E i
(Continued )

6.	Output: Reconstruct the node path with subnodes, then convert it into
edge path
1)	Replace sequences ^t _X , t X_ h in L as X, e.g., 6A, t AB , t BC, C@ " 6A, B, C @
2)	Turn node path L into edge path O " E 1 " g " D

n it, h it, and x it represent the total number of vehicles, the
total length of vehicles, and the estimated travel time associated with the remaining part of alternative route i, respectively. Finally, we have to carefully design the reward
function, which is basically the driving force behind the
action. Since the objective has always been to navigate vehicles toward the destination within the shortest time possible, the reward function is defined as rt = -t plus some
penalty to prevent frequent switching between alternative

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

28

• MAY/JUNE 2024

routes. The overall decision-making framework for adaptive route guidance is illustrated in Figure 3.
With a well-defined state space, action space, and reward function, the DQN as the policy network can then be
trained iteratively by interacting with the simulation until
convergence. The rule to iteratively update the approximate Q-value is shown next.
Q(s t, a t) ! Q(s t, a t) + a[rt + c max Q(s t +1, a) - Q(s t, a t)]. (2)
Two key ingredients of the DQN algorithm are the target
network and the experience reply [53]. The target network
requires that two neural networks be prepared, one being
the online network and the other being the target network.
These two networks are initialized with the same weights,
but the target network copies only the updated parameters
of the online network every fixed number of steps. By doing so, the DQN algorithm becomes more stable compared
with the standard online Q-learning. Thus, the loss function to update parameters is defined as
L(w) = E[(rt + c max Q (s t +1, a t +1; wl ) - Q (s t, a t; w))2 ]. (3)
The experience replay is another important feature
of the DQN algorithm in that it eliminates the undesir-

States
[Estimated Traveltime
Number of Vehicles,
and Length of
Vehicles for the
Remaining Sections
of Plans A, B, and C]

able correlation between successive samples. This is
achieved by putting the collected samples into a replay
memory from which a sample is then randomly selected
for training and updating the DQN. The overall DQN
algorithm for adaptive route guidance is summarized
in Algorithm 3.
Another critical aspect of RL that may pose problems for
the route choice task is its exploration characteristic. In the
early stages of training, the agent is prone to taking random
actions to explore the prospect of different routes. However,
this random action selection may lead to situations where
the selected action is actually infeasible. For example, a
vehicle cannot perform an action that teleports itself to an
edge that is not connected to the current one. To overcome
this limitation, we further combine an action masking technique with the previously mentioned DQN algorithm. The
main idea is to conceal part of the output values of the DQN
before the execution of the maximum value operation. In
other words, given the current edge where the vehicle is
located and a new decision that must be made on the route
choice, we mask those infeasible actions that the agent need
not explore and perform. The immediate effect is that only
the output values associated with the rest of the actions are

Action
Overlapping
Segments

Plan C

[Plans A, B, and C]

Reward

Plan A

Plan B

Give a Penalty
Every Seconds and
Penalize Frequent
Path Switching

Decision Segments

FIG 3 The proposed decision-making framework for adaptive route guidance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

29

• MAY/JUNE 2024

considered, from which the best one is taken as per the
Q-value maximization rule.

Simulation Experiments
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
to adaptive route choice and its better performance than
some other approaches, simulation experiments on both a
toy network and a real-world network of Suzhou, China,
are performed.

Toy Network
To construct the basic simulation environment in SUMO,
one is required to first configure the road network and
then generate the background traffic. Road network
configuration can be done by either using the road network editing tool (as for the toy network) or resorting to
the built-in function NETCONVERT for converting open
source OpenStreetMap (OSM) to the SUMO-required format (as for the real-word network). Background traffic can
be easily inserted into the simulation by defining it as the
demand in the input file. Parameters in relation to various aspects of the simulation, such as signal timing and
bus operation, can certainly be set and adjusted if needed.
The overall workflow of the simulation experiments is illustrated in Figure 4.

Algorithm 3. Adaptive route guidance based on DQN.
initialize: Replay buffer R, action-value function Q, batch number n s
for i ! " 1, 2, f, n episode , do
initialize: action space A = " p 1, p 2, p 3 ,,
     state s 0 = ( n 1, n 2, n 3, h 1, h 2, h 3, x 1, x 2, x 3)
for t ! " 1, 2, f, T , do
  if vehicle in decision segments then
   select route a t ! A
   perform action a t , obtain the next state s t +1
   and reward rt
   if terminal then
     y t = rt
   else
     y t = rt + c max a Q (s t + 1, a ; ~)
   end if
   store experience (s t , a t , rt , s t +1, y t ) into R
   if R $ n s then
    sample random minibatch of memories
    (s j , a j , rj , s j +1) from R
   else
     use all the memories in R
   end if
   calculate dL (~) = E s, a [( y - Q (s, a ; ~)) d ~ Q (s, a ; ~)]
   update ~ ! ~ - adL (~)
  end if
end for
end for

The toy network consists of 14 nodes and 19 edges (see
Figure 5). Some of the nodes are controlled by fixed-time
signals. The upper left corner and the lower right corner of the network correspond to the starting and ending
points of the trip. Two types of vehicles, namely private
cars and public buses, are considered in the simulation
with different vehicular attributes, such as length and
speed. Background traffic is randomly generated during
the simulation.
Table 1 summarizes the hyperparameters used during
the training process. Ten thousand episodes are executed
for training with a learning rate of 0.003. The exploration
rate for actions is 0.015, and the discount factor for the reward function is 0.99. The size of the replay memory for
storing training samples is 10,000, while the size of the
minibatch for parameter updates is 32.
As shown in Figure 6, in the early stages of the training process, the agent tends to perform more exploration, resulting in notable fluctuations in the convergence
curve, as expected. But gradually, the curve flattens out
and stabilizes at a moderate level, meaning that the
agent has successfully learned its optimal policy through
extensive interactions with the environment. To be precise, the convergence pattern assures us that we have
obtained a route planner that is able to adaptively navigate vehicles through the network with the least travel
time possible.
The trained agent is now fed into the simulation to
examine the actual performance of the route choice.
The same background traffic and departure time are
considered in the comparison of different routing plans.
As shown in Figure 5, the actual route chosen by the
agent is a combination of two alternative routes from
the choice set, possibly due to the changing traffic conditions during the simulation. At the departure time,
the agent chooses Plan 3 with the least travel time. But
it switches to Plan 1 en route with the shortest travel
distance. The advantage of this routing option can be
clearly verified in Table 2, showing the travel time experienced for different plans.
Figure 7 shows the variations of the total number of vehicles in the remaining part of the three alternative routes
over the course of the simulation. At the very beginning, Plan
3 has the lowest number of vehicles traveling on the route,
which is consistent with the fact that it also has the least
estimated travel time. As the simulation proceeds, Plan 1
starts to have the lowest number of vehicles instead due to
the changing traffic conditions. This observation triggers a
new decision from the agent on the route choice to switch
the plan. The results obtained from the toy network experiment reveal the effectiveness of the DRL-based approach to
adaptive route guidance in relatively simple traffic environments. In the following, we will examine its performance in
a more complex real-world network.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

30

• MAY/JUNE 2024

Real-World Network
The core area of Suzhou, China, is selected as the realworld network for further case study. The same simulation workflow as per Figure 4 is followed to construct the
road network as well as the background traffic. Figure 8
shows the network layout of the selected area in the OSM
format and its corresponding simulation environment
in SUMO. The network consists of 2,423 nodes and 4,970
edges. Information on public transportation operations is
extracted from reality and incorporated into the simulation, which includes 18 bus routes and 43 bus stops. Random background traffic consisting of 80% private cars
and 20% public buses is generated, and the total volume
is 10,000 vehicles/h. And again, they have different attributes, such as length and speed.
Table 3 compares the travel time experienced in the
real-world network associated with different routes, considering one trip with a relatively short travel distance
and the other with a longer distance. The actual route

that is chosen by the agent is also indicated in the table
and turns out to be one of the three alternative routes
without any combinations. For the trip with a relatively
short travel distance, the agent departs in the simulation
at 249 s by choosing Plan 2. Although it never switches
the plan en route, the travel time experienced turns out
to be the lowest among all the alternative routes. Similar results can be observed for the longer trip, showing
that the agent sticks to Plan 2 following its departure at
150 s in the simulation without the need to switch to the
other alternatives.
We now examine the performance of the DRL model
in controlling multiple vehicles rather than just a single
one. The results are shown in Figure 9, where the horizontal and vertical axes represent the travel time obtained by the DRL model and the default shortest-path
algorithm in SUMO. First, we let the trained agent control 10 vehicles in the simulation. It is evident that the
scattered data points are primarily lying in the upper

Table 1. Hyperparameters used during the training process.
OSM
NETCONVERT

Network Edge
Labeling
Algorithm

Random Trips
Generation
Origin Net

Background
Traffic Flow

Modified Net

Agent Vehicle

Adaptive Route Guidance
Algorithm

DRL Algorithm

Hyperparameter

Value

Number of episodes

10,000

Learning rate

0.003

Exploration rate

0.015

Discount factor

0.99

Replay memory size

10,000

Minibatch size

32

FIG 4 The overall workflow of the simulation experiments.

Return

RL Model Training

–240
–260
–280
–300
–320
–340
–360
0

(a)

(b)

Episode Return
Smoothed Episode Return

2,000

4,000
6,000
Episode

8,000

10,000

FIG 6 The convergence pattern of the return during the training process.

Table 2. A comparison of the travel time experienced from the
different plans in the toy network.
(c)

(d)

FIG 5 Different route choice plans in the toy network. (a) The route with
the shortest travel distance. (b) The route with the lowest impact of traffic
signals. (c) The route with the least instantaneous travel time. (d) The
route chosen by the RL agent.

Route

Departure Time (s)

Arrival Time (s)

Plan 1

431

699

Plan 2

431

708

Plan 3

431

731

Plan chosen by the agent

431

643

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

31

• MAY/JUNE 2024

a significant difference between the two route choice
models. With a higher number of vehicles controlled by
the trained agent (namely 50), the performance advantage of the DRL approach remains as the majority of the
points are still located in the upper half. The results obtained from the real-world network
experiment further demonstrate
the capability of the DR L-based
The Plan Chosen by the RL Model
adaptive route guidance to effectively navigate vehicles in complex
traffic environments.

40
30

50

20

Depart

10

450

500

550
600
Simu
latio
n Tim
e (s)

650

700

FIG 7 A 3D representation of different route choice plans in the toy network.

(a)

(b)

FIG 8 The network layout of Suzhou, China. (a) An OSM map.
(b) A simulation network.

Table 3. A comparison of the travel time experienced in the
real-world network.
No.

Route

Departure
Time (s)

Arrival
Time (s)

Length
(m)

1

Plan 1

249

776

1,316

Plan 2 (chosen by the agent)

249

743

1,361

Plan 3

249

871

1,392

Plan 1

150

601

4,382

Plan 2 (chosen by the agent)

150

597

4,490

Plan 3

150

721

5,555

2

Conclusion

In this article, to find the optimal
route for vehicles in stochastic and
dy namic traffic networks, a new
30
DR L -based adaptive route guid20
ance model is proposed and tested.
10
The model aims to navigate vehicles
0
through complex traffic environ1
ments toward the destination within
2
3
the least amount of time possible. The
Plan
overall modeling framework consists
of three interconnected algorithms,
namely a network edge labeling algorithm, a routing plan identification algorithm, and an
adaptive route guidance algorithm. Some techniques, such
as limiting the choice set and masking infeasible actions,
are incorporated into the framework so that its computational efficiency can be improved, especially for largescale networks. Simulation experiments are performed
on both a toy network and a real-world network to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in terms
of guiding a single vehicle as well as multiple vehicles. The
results consistently indicate the performance advantage of
the DRL model in route choice over the other alternatives.
The proposed DRL model for route choice can be part
of an online map service or mobility-as-a-service (MaaS)
systems. In MaaS, there is certainly the need to deploy a
route choice model whereby vehicles can efficiently travel through complex traffic environments and adapt to the
ongoing congestion dynamics. To achieve this ambitious
goal, further research is required in various aspects. For
example, one direction is to find ways to consider and
model the interactions among multiple vehicles for cooperative route guidance. The associated challenge is probably the large number of vehicles to be simultaneously
included in this cooperative game. Clustering could be
one possible solution to this problem. Another direction
is to jointly consider various types of travel choices, including the mode choice, the departure time choice, and
the route choice, and propose an integrated travel choice
model since these choices are inherently correlated with
one another.
40

Arrive

Total Number of Vehicles
Remaining in the Plan (veh)

half of the plane, indicating that vehicles controlled by
the DRL model generally experience less travel time
given the same traffic conditions. The strip area in
light blue corresponds to the 1% variations of the travel
time. Points that lie within this area may not indicate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

32

• MAY/JUNE 2024

Ziyuan Gu (ziyuangu@seu.edu.cn)
earned his Ph.D. degree from the University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. He is currently an associate
professor with the School of Transportation at Southeast University, Nanjing
210096, China. His research interests
include transport pricing, traffic simulation, and simulation-based optimization.

Vehicle Travel Time Controlled by
Default Model in SUMO(s)

400
380
360
340
320
300

Xun Yang (yangxunseu@seu.edu.cn) is
currently pursuing his M.S. degree in
traffic and transportation engineering
at Southeast University, Nanjing 210096,
China. His research interests include
reinforcement learning, microscopic
traffic modeling, and transportation

280
280
360
380
400
300
320
340
Vehicle Travel Time Controlled by RL Model (s)
(a)

Vehicle Travel Time Controlled by
Default Model in SUMO(s)

600
550

big data analysis.

500
450
400
350
300

300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Vehicle Travel Time Controlled by RL Model (s)
(b)

FIG 9 (a) and (b) A travel time comparison between the DRL model and the
default shortest-path algorithm in SUMO in controlling multiple vehicles.

Acknowledgment
This study is supported by the Key Project (Grant 52131203)
and the Youth Program (Grant 52102375) of the National
Natural Science Foundation of China, and the Youth Program
(Grant BK20210247) of the Natural Science Foundation of
Jiangsu Province, China. Ziyuan Gu acknowledges support
from the High-Level Personnel Project of Jiangsu Province,
China. Ziyuan Gu acknowledges support from the HighLevel Personnel Project of Jiangsu Province, China (Grant
JSSCBS20220099).

About the Authors
Yunyang Shi (yunyang-shi@seu.edu.
cn) earned his M.S. degree in traffic
and transportation engineering from
Southeast University, Jiangsu, China,
in 2018. He is currently pursuing his
Ph.D. degree in traffic and transportation engineering at Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. His research interests include
traffic and autonomous vehicle simulation.

Yingdi Li (yingdi.li@qq.com) earned
his B.E. degree in traffic and transportation engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2022. He is
currently pursuing his M.S. degree in
traffic and transportation engineering
at Southeast University, Nanjing 210096,
China. His research interests include transportation big
data analysis.
Zixuan Chu (psxzc5@nottingham.
ac.uk) earned his M.S. degree in computer science from the University of
Nottingham in 2022. He is currently a
visiting scholar at Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. His research
interests include deep learning and
transportation big data analysis.

References

[1] D. Huang, J. Xing, Z. Liu, and Q. An, “A multi-stage stochastic optimization approach to the stop-skipping and bus lane reservation
schemes,” Transportmetrica A, Transp. Sci., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1272–
1304, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1080/23249935.2020.1858206.
[2] X. Qin, J. Ke, X. Wang, Y. Tang, and H. Yang, “Demand management for
smart transportation: A review,” Multimodal Transp., vol. 1, no. 4, Dec.
2022, Art. no. 100038, doi: 10.1016/j.multra.2022.100038.
[3] H. Chai, H. M. Zhang, D. Ghosal, and C.-N. Chuah, “Dynamic traffic routing in a network with adaptive signal control,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 85, pp. 64–85, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2017.08.017.
[4] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,” Numer. Math., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 269–271, Dec. 1959, doi: 10.1007/BF01386390.
[5] G. Nannicini, D. Delling, L. Liberti, and D. Schultes, “Bidirectional
A* search for time-dependent fast paths,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Exp.
Algorithms, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 334–346.
[6] R. W. Hall, “The fastest path through a network with random timedependent travel times,” Transp. Sci., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 182–188, Aug.
1986, doi: 10.1287/trsc.20.3.182.
[7] C. Mao and Z. Shen, “A reinforcement learning framework for the
adaptive routing problem in stochastic time-dependent network,”
Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 93, pp. 179–197, Aug. 2018, doi:
10.1016/j.trc.2018.06.001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

33

• MAY/JUNE 2024

[8] J. Wu and X. Qu, “Intersection control with connected and automated
vehicles: A review,” J. Intell. Connected Veh., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 260–269,
Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1108/JICV-06-2022-0023.
[9] B. Peng, M. F. Keskin, B. Kulcsár, and H. Wymeersch, “Connected
autonomous vehicles for improving mixed traffic efficiency in unsignalized intersections with deep reinforcement learning,” Commun.
Transp. Res., vol. 1, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 100017, doi: 10.1016/j.commtr.2021.100017.
[10] M. Schiller, M. Dupius, D. Krajzewicz, A. Kern, and A. Knoll, “Multiresolution traffic simulation for large-scale high-fidelity evaluation of
VANET applications,” in Proc. Simul. Urban Traffic Scenarios, Cham,
Switzerland, 2019, pp. 17–36.
[11] A. Navarro et al., “Using reinforcement learning and simulation to develop autonomous vehicle control strategies,” presented at the WCX
SAE World Congr. Experience, Apr. 2020, Paper 2020-01-0737.
[12] Z. Gu, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, and M. Saberi, “Network traffic instability with automated driving and cooperative merging,” Transp. Res.
C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 138, May 2022, Art. no. 103626, doi: 10.1016/
j.trc.2022.103626.
[13] Q. Cheng et al., “Estimating key traffic state parameters through parsimonious spatial queue models,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol.,
vol. 137, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 103596, doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2022.103596.
[14] J. Huo, Z. Liu, J. Chen, Q. Cheng, and Q. Meng, “Bayesian optimization
for congestion pricing problems: A general framework and its instability,” Transp. Res. B, Methodological, vol. 169, pp. 1–28, Mar. 2023, doi:
10.1016/j.trb.2023.01.003.
[15] D. Eppstein, “Finding the k shortest paths,” SIAM J. Comput., vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 652–673, 1998, doi: 10.1137/S0097539795290477.
[16] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern.,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, Jul. 1968, doi: 10.1109/TSSC.1968.300136.
[17] G. R. Jagadeesh, T. Srikanthan, and K. Quek, “Heuristic techniques
for accelerating hierarchical routing on road networks,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 301–309, Dec. 2002, doi: 10.1109/
TITS.2002.806806.
[18] A. V. Goldberg and C. Harrelson, “Computing the shortest path: A
search meets graph theory,” in Proc. 16th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2005, vol. 5, pp. 156–165.
[19] A. R. Güner, A. Murat, and R. B. Chinnam, “Dynamic routing under
recurrent and non-recurrent congestion using real-time ITS information,” Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 358–373, Feb. 2012, doi:
10.1016/j.cor.2011.04.012.
[20] L. Xiao and H. K. Lo, “Adaptive vehicle routing for risk-averse travelers,” Proc.-Social Behav. Sci., vol. 80, pp. 633–657, Jun. 2013, doi:
10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.05.034.
[21] X. Pi and Z. S. Qian, “A stochastic optimal control approach for realtime traffic routing considering demand uncertainties and travelers’ choice heterogeneity,” Transp. Res. B, Methodological, vol. 104,
pp. 710–732, Oct. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.trb.2017.06.002.
[22] L. Fu and L. R. Rilett, “Expected shortest paths in dynamic and stochastic traffic networks,” Transp. Res. B, Methodological, vol. 32, no. 7,
pp. 499–516, Sep. 1998, doi: 10.1016/S0191-2615(98)00016-2.
[23] J. Ding, Z. Chen, and Z. Yuan, “Dynamic optimization routing method
based on ant adaptive algorithm,” Control Decis., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 751–
753, 2003.
[24] X. Zong, S. Xiong, Z. Fang, and Q. Li, “Multi-ant colony system for
evacuation routing problem with mixed traffic flow,” in Proc. IEEE
Congr. Evol. Comput., 2010, pp. 1–6.
[25] M. A. Abdel-Aty, R. Kitamura, and P. P. Jovanis, “Using stated preference data for studying the effect of advanced traffic information on
drivers’ route choice,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 39–50, Feb. 1997, doi: 10.1016/S0968-090X(96)00023-X.
[26] H. Gan and X. Ye, “Leave the expressway or not? Impact of dynamic
information,” J. Modern Transp., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 96–103, Jun. 2014,
doi: 10.1007/s40534-014-0043-1.
[27] S. Gao, E. Frejinger, and M. Ben-Akiva, “Adaptive route choices in
risky traffic networks: A prospect theory approach,” Transp. Res. C,
Emerg. Technol., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 727–740, Oct. 2010, doi: 10.1016/
j.trc.2009.08.001.
[28] M. A. El-Gamal and D. M. Grether, “Are people Bayesian? Uncovering behavioral strategies,” J. Amer. Statistical Assoc., vol. 90, no. 432,
pp. 1137–1145, Dec. 1995, doi: 10.1080/01621459.1995.10476620.
[29] C. Xiong, X. Chen, X. He, X. Lin, and L. Zhang, “Agent-based en-route
diversion: Dynamic behavioral responses and network performance represented by macroscopic fundamental diagrams,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 64, pp. 148–163, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2015.04.008.
[30] X. Simon Zhou et al., “A meso-to-macro cross-resolution performance approach for connecting polynomial arrival queue model to volume-delay
function with inflow demand-to-capacity ratio,” Multimodal Transp., vol.
1, no. 2, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100017, doi: 10.1016/j.multra.2022.100017.

[31] R. Yan and S. Wang, “Integrating prediction with optimization: Models and applications in transportation management,” Multimodal
Transp., vol. 1, no. 3, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 100018, doi: 10.1016/j.multra.
2022.100018.
[32] B. Zhou, Q. Song, Z. Zhao, and T. Liu, “A reinforcement learning
scheme for the equilibrium of the in-vehicle route choice problem
based on congestion game,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 371, Apr. 2020,
Art. no. 124895, doi: 10.1016/j.amc.2019.124895.
[33] F. Klügl and A. L. C. Bazzan, “Accelerating route choice learning
with experience sharing in a commuting scenario: An agent-based
approach,” AI Commun., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 105–119, Jan. 2021, doi:
10.3233/AIC-201582.
[34] G. D. Dos Santos and A. L. Bazzan, “Sharing diverse information gets driver agents to learn faster: An application in en route trip building,” PeerJ
Comput. Sci., vol. 7, Mar. 2021, Art. no. e428, doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.428.
[35] V. Mnih et al., “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.5602.
[36] Y.-R. Chen, A. Rezapour, W.-G. Tzeng, and S.-C. Tsai, “RL-routing: An
SDN routing algorithm based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 3185–3199, Oct./Dec. 2020, doi:
10.1109/TNSE.2020.3017751.
[37] S. Koh et al., “Real-time deep reinforcement learning based vehicle
navigation,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 96, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 106694, doi:
10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106694.
[38] N. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, and Z. Li, “Sim-to-real: Mapless
navigation for USVs using deep reinforcement learning,” J. Mar. Sci.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 7, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 895, doi: 10.3390/jmse10070895.
[39] G. Sun, K. Liu, G. O. Boateng, G. Liu, and W. Jiang, “Intelligent cruise
guidance and vehicle resource management with deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3574–3585, Mar.
2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3098779.
[40] R. Cimurs, I. H. Suh, and J. H. Lee, “Goal-driven autonomous exploration through deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 730–737, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1109/LRA.2021.3133591.
[41] S. Shafiei, Z. Gu, and M. Saberi, “Calibration and validation of a simulation-based dynamic traffic assignment model for a large-scale
congested network,” Simul. Model. Pract. Theory, vol. 86, pp. 169–186,
Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.simpat.2018.04.006.
[42] H. Qi and Z. He, “Road intersection optimization considering spatialtemporal interactions among turning movement spillovers,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4291–4304, May 2022, doi:
10.1109/TITS.2020.3043274.
[43] P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, and E. Wiener, “Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO,” in Proc. 21st IEEE
Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, pp. 2575–2582, doi: 10.1109/
ITSC.2018.8569938.
[44] L. Luo, L. Sheng, H. Yu, and G. Sun, “Intersection-based V2X routing via reinforcement learning in vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 5446–5459, Jun. 2022, doi:
10.1109/TITS.2021.3053958.
[45] S. Koh, B. Zhou, P. Yang, Z. Yang, H. Fang, and J. Feng, “Reinforcement
learning for vehicle route optimization in SUMO,” in Proc. IEEE 4th
Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), 2018, pp. 1468–1473.
[46] W. M. Griggs, R. H. Ordóñez-Hurtado, E. Crisostomi, F. Häusler, K.
Massow, and R. N. Shorten, “A large-scale SUMO-based emulation
platform,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3050–
3059, Dec. 2015, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2015.2426056.
[47] M. Zamirian, M. H. Farahi, and A. Nazemi, “An applicable method for
solving the shortest path problems,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 190, no.
2, pp. 1479–1486, Jul. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.amc.2007.02.057.
[48] Z. Gu, F. Safarighouzhdi, M. Saberi, and T. H. Rashidi, “A macro-micro
approach to modeling parking,” Transp. Res. B, Methodological, vol.
147, pp. 220–244, May 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.trb.2021.03.012.
[49] Z. Gu, A. Najmi, M. Saberi, W. Liu, and T. H. Rashidi, “Macroscopic
parking dynamics modeling and optimal real-time pricing considering cruising-for-parking,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 118,
Sep. 2020, Art. no. 102714, doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2020.102714.
[50] Y.-L. Chen and H.-H. Yang, “Shortest paths in traffic-light networks,”
Transp. Res. B, Methodological, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 241–253, May 2000,
doi: 10.1016/S0191-2615(99)00023-5.
[51] M. Khanjary, K. Faez, M. R. Meybodi, and M. Sabaei, “Shortest paths
in synchronized traffic-light networks,” in Proc. 24th Can. Conf. Elect.
Comput. Eng. (CCECE), 2011, pp. 882–886.
[52] Y.-L. Chen and H.-H. Yang, “Minimization of travel time and weighted
number of stops in a traffic-light network,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 144,
no. 3, pp. 565–580, Feb. 2003, doi: 10.1016/S0377-2217(02)00148-0.
[53] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, Feb. 2015, doi:
10.1038/nature14236.



Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:09:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
IEEE INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MAGAZINE •

34

• MAY/JUNE 2024

