2022 IEEE International Symposium on Product Compliance Engineering - Asia (ISPCE-ASIA) | 979-8-3503-3248-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISPCE-ASIA57917.2022.9970805

Path Planning in Urban Environment Based on
Traffic Condition Perception and Traffic Light Status
1st Bin Song

4th Tian Chen

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan, China
SongBinCS@whut.edu.cn

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan, China
chentian@whut.edu.cn

2nd Weiyang Chen

5th Bingyi Liu*

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan, China
weiyangchen@whut.edu.cn

School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan, China
Chongqing Research Institute, Wuhan University
of Technology
Chongqing, China
byliu@whut.edu.cn

3rd Xinyu Zhou
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan, China
297932@whut.edu.cn

Abstract—Vehicle path planning problems have been studied
for decades. The existing path planning methods are suitable for
simple objectives. However, for complex tasks such as planning
paths for vehicles considering the effects of pedestrians, traffic
lights, etc., it is difficult to design a reasonable cost function for
the deterministic algorithm or a reasonable heuristic function
for the heuristic algorithm. In this paper, we proposes a path
planning model based on traffic light status and traffic condition
awareness. When a vehicle arrives at a new road section, it
senses the traffic light status, distribution and vehicle positions
in the road network on each road section through V2V and
V2I communication, and based on this information, we use an
A2C-based deep reinforcement learning method to dynamically
plan the shortest path for the vehicle in real time. Experiments
show that the proposed method works effectively in terms of
saving on driving time and waiting time to reach any destinations,
compared to the existing solutions.
Index Terms—Traffic light status, traffic flow, deep reinforcement learning

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the continuous increase of vehicle and urbanization,
traffic congestion has become a widespread concern, increasing travel time and aggravating environmental pollution. If
traffic congestion is not improved in the long term, it will lead
to many serious social problems [1]. For vehicle drivers, the
effective way to avoid traffic congestion is to obtain real-time
traffic information and plan a reasonable route.
* Corresponding author

To solve the path planning problem, scholars have proposed many classical algorithms, which can be divided into
the following categories: deterministic methods, heuristics,
metaheuristics, and reinforcement learning methods. The first
proposed algorithms are the Dijkstra and Floyd algorithms,
the former of which computes the shortest path between any
two nodes, and the latter, namely the Floyd algorithm [2],
which computes the shortest path between all nodes in the road
network. Although many new algorithms have been proposed
after the Dijkstra and Floyd algorithms, they are still classical
algorithms with less time complexity compared with other
algorithms.
There are many algorithms for heuristic search, such as
local merit search, best-first search, A* algorithm, and so
on. The A* algorithm [3], which was first proposed by Hart
Nilsson, speeds up the search by introducing the valuation
function, improves the accuracy of the local merit search, and
thus obtains a wide range of applications. It is currently the
shortest-circuit algorithm. Its time complexity is O(bd), where
b is the average number of nodes, and d is the search depth
of the shortest circuit from the start to the end. Many scholars
have made improvements to the A* algorithm, such as the D*
algorithm [4], D*Lite algorithm [5], etc.
Both the deterministic and heuristic methods described
above work well with simple objectives. However, for complex
tasks such as planning paths for vehicles considering the
effects of pedestrians, traffic lights, etc., it is challenging to
design a reasonable cost function for the Dijkstra algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

or a proper heuristic function for the A* algorithm. In 1991,
Colorni and Dorigo proposed the Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO) [6], a bionic algorithm inspired by the foraging behavior of ants. The ant colony algorithm is widely used to
solve dynamic path planning problems because ants tend to
take paths with high pheromone foraging. Although the ant
colony algorithm has high robustness, the algorithm is prone
to the local optimum problem. Sangeetha et al. proposed an
intelligent gain-based ant colony path planning algorithm to
solve the local optimum problem. However, the ant colony
algorithm needs a long enough running time to converge in
the case of a large road network size.
The ultimate goal of reinforcement learning is to obtain the
optimal policy by maximizing the reward value, which has
a strong decision-making capability. In increasingly complex
real-world applications, deep learning is needed to extract
high-level features from large-scale raw data, and has strong
perceptual capabilities, but lacks certain decision-making capabilities. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) combines the
decision-making ability of reinforcement learning with the
perceptual ability of deep learning, which can be controlled
directly based on the input information and is an artificial
intelligence approach closer to human thinking. Nazari et
al. present an end-to-end framework for solving the Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP) using deep reinforcement learning [7].
Compared with the heuristic algorithm, the solution quality
and computation time (after training) are better than the
classical heuristics. Koh et al. propose a deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) method to build a real-time intelligent vehicle
routing and navigation system by formulating the task as a
sequence of decisions [8]. The results show that the proposed
method provides a better navigation solution than the benchmark routing optimization algorithms. Given the advantages of
deep reinforcement learning over other methods for complex
path planning problems, we use a deep reinforcement learning
method based on the A2C algorithm.
With the development of communication technology, vehicles and vehicles, vehicles and infrastructure are able to
form a Vehicular Ad Hoc Network (VANET). Each vehicle
can get real-time information about the traffic density of each
road section and the traffic light status of each intersection
in the whole road network, which provides data support
for real-time path planning. In addition, 5G technology can
provide higher bandwidth and greater scalability to support
the decision-making process of path planning and deal with
traffic congestion in more complex scenarios [9].
According to the idea above, we have conducted some
important work in the paper. The main contribution points of
the article are as follows:
•

We establish a timing relationship for each traffic light in
the road network. Then vehicles collect the traffic density
of each road section and the traffic light status of each
intersection through VANETs. Then, based on the traffic
density of each section of the entire road network and the
traffic light status of each intersection, we dynamically

•

•

plan the shortest time-consuming path of vehicles for
each passing section in real time.
Our method takes into account the effect of traffic light
status on the passage time. The time spent waiting for
traffic lights is added to the design of the reward function
for reinforcement learning.
We explored the relationship between average travel time,
average waiting time and average distance traveled with
different traffic light durations. The experiments show
that our method reduces the average travel time and
average waiting time for different traffic light durations
compared with the existing methods.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents the system model, Section III presents the method,
Section IV presents the experiment and result, and finally
SectionV gives the conclusion and discussion.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
A. Traffic Light Timing Relationship Model
According to the design requirements of traffic lights in
real traffic scenarios, we use the timing relationship of traffic
light phases in the road network as shown in Fig. 1. This
distribution method has traffic flows from different directions
in each phase. For example, in phase A, there is straight
and right-turning traffic from the north and south. In phase
B, there is left-turning traffic from the north and south, and
the four phases together constitute a complete signal cycle.
Each traffic light changes periodically according to the rule of
phase A → phase B → phase C → phase D → phase A. In
addition, we assign the same duration to each traffic light in
the road network so that intelligent vehicles can better learn
the periodic change pattern of traffic lights.

Fig. 1. Traffic light phase graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. M ETHOD

TABLE I
EDGE ATTRIBUTES.

A. Reinforcement Learning Process

Road number

Road vehicle number

length

e1
e2
...

num1
num2
...

len1
len2
...

Note: e1 represents the road from Intersection v1 to Intersection v2, e2
represents the road from Intersection v2 to Intersection v1 , e3 represents
the road from Intersection v4 to Intersection v1, the weight on each edge
is the density of vehicles. The vehicle density is defined as the number
of vehicles on the road per unit length, the definition of the weight of the
i-th edge formula is numi / leni , numi denotes the number of vehicles
on the i-th lane, and leni denotes the length of the i-th road.

State. Each time a vehicle reaches a new roadway, it
indicates a new state. As shown in figure a below, the state
of the agent at road segment e1 is s1. The vehicle enters road
segment e2 after the left-turn action a1, and the state is s2.
Action. In the road network, the reinforcement learning
agent can only turn left, turn right or go straight from one
state to another, so the action space is 3, which are left turn,
right turn and go straight.
Reward. The design of rewards directly affects the effect of
reinforcement learning. In this paper, the reward is the opposite
of the sum of the vehicle’s travel time and waiting time:
reward = −(Ttravel + Twait )

TABLE II
NODE ATTRIBUTES.
Intersection

T raf f iclight phase

Connected road section

v1
v2
...

Phase1
Phase2
...

e1, e2, e3, e4
e1, e2, e5, e6
...

Note: Each intersection has one traffic light, the phase of the i-th traffic
light is phi , the duration of the i-th traffic light is timei , and each
traffic light changes periodically according to the pattern of phaseA →
phaseB → phaseC → phaseD → phaseA. Each intersection is connected
to several roads.

B. Road Network Model
We use the directed graph shown in Fig. 3 to represent
the entire road network, where each node represents an intersection and each edge represents a road segment, with nodes
and edges as V = {v1, v2, v3..., n9} , E = {e1, e2, e3, ..., e22}
respectively, each edge and each node has the following
properties: as shown below.

(1)

Reinforcement learning seeks long-term reward. It is possible that a short-term action may bring a large reward, but that
action may have a negative impact on future decisions.Hence,
reinforcement learning uses the cumulative discounted return
when updating network parameters. The formula for the cumulative discount return is as follows:
U = R + γR1 + γ 2 R2 + γ i Ri + · · ·

(2)

where U is the cumulative discount return, γ is the discount
factor and Ri is the reward for step i
where the cumulative discount factor 0 < γ < 1, the γ i is
less than 1, which means that the reward obtained at the later
step has less weight than the previous one, and in the process
of path planning, the time consumed by passing each section
should have the same weight in the total passage time, so the
cumulative discount factor should be set to 1.
The agent planning path can be abstracted as a Markov
decision process by reinforcement learning, as shown in Fig.
3.
When the agent is in state s1, the base station next to the
road section collects information on the number of vehicles in
each section of the road network and the status of traffic lights
at each intersection through communication with vehicles and
traffic lights. The agent will perform action a1 to enter the state
s2 after observing this information. We count the time Ttravel
and the time Twait of the agent in the process of switching
from the state s1 to the state s2, and use the opposite of the
time t1 as the reward r1 for the agent, iterating the process
until we train a strategy with the shortest time.
B. Advantage Actor-Critic Algorithm

Fig. 2. Road network directed graph.

In the path planning scenario, we choose the A2C (Advantage Actor-Critic) algorithm because it has better learning
ability and robustness than the DQN (Deep Q-Learning)
algorithm.
The A2C algorithm is a policy gradient-based algorithm
[10], unlike the Q-learning algorithm [11] [12], which learns
the optimal policy directly as it interacts with the environment.
The A2C algorithm has two structures: actor and critic, where
the actor interacts with the environment and outputs the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. The intuitive structure and training process of A2C.

IV. E XPERIMENT
Fig. 3. Agent state transition .

A. Experiment Setting and Parameter Setting
corresponding actions based on its observations; and then the
critic scores the actions performed by the actor. In the process
of simultaneous learning, the critic’s evaluation of the action
becomes more and more accurate. Under the guidance of the
critic, the actor knows the best action to perform in different
states.
In fact, the value of the critic network’s evaluation of the
action can be approximated by a neural network, and the actor
is a policy function that can also be represented by a neural
network. Both the actor and the critic are fully connected
neural networks. The actor network inputs state, outputs action
probability distribution, selects action from it, and uses it
as an input to the critic network. The loss function of the
actor network subtracts a baseline from the Q-value of the
Policy Gradient loss function to make the feedback positive
and negative and reduce the fluctuation of the network. The
critic neural network has the following update formula:
Aπ (st , at ) ≈ r(at , st ) + γVθπ (st+1 ) − Vθπ (st )

(3)

θ ←− θ + αAπ (st , at )∇θ V π (st , at )

(4)

where Aπ (st , at ) is the advantage function, α is the learning
rate, and θ is the critic network parameter,V indicates status
value.
At each step, the policy network parameter θ is updateed
by:
θ ←− θ + β∇θ logπθ (a|s)Aπ (s, a)

(5)

Where β is the learning rate of policy network. The A2C
algorithm model graph is shown in Fig.4.

We simulate our proposed approach using the SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility) open source simulation platform,
a free, open-source, highly portable, microscopic, and continuous multi-modal traffic simulation package. SUMO comes
with a number of support tools to automate the core tasks of
traffic simulation creation, execution, and evaluation, such as
network import, route calculation, visualization, and emission
calculation. SUMO can be enhanced with custom models and
provides various APIs to control the simulation remotely. For
example, it provides a Traci interface to provide accurate and
flexible traffic control and a large amount of real-time statistics
for analysis. Therefore, it is well suited for traffic control
model development.
We use the total length of 4 km, the width of 3.9 km of a road
network area for simulation experiments. The road network
contains 51 intersections and 158 road sections, and the length
of each road section varies. The maximum speed of each road
section during the experiment is 50 km/h, to investigate the
impact of the signal duration of the road network on the path
planning, we set the signal duration of 10s, 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s,
60s,70s,80s,90s, and 100s, respectively.
SUMO is used to simulate the traffic conditions in the urban
road network, with some simplifications compared to the urban
scenario. Still, it can effectively demonstrate the feasibility
and effectiveness of our proposed method. In the experimental
process, the vehicles that need to do the route planning are
driven from outside the road network and finally make their
way out of the road network. We first list all the different
combinations of origin and destination and then calculate the
average travel time, the average waiting time, and the average
travel distance of each scenario in all the above-mentioned
combinations of origin and destination.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Evaluation Indicators
In our experimental scenario, vehicles enter the road network from different intersections and can make their way
out of the network from different intersections. To avoid the
chance of experimental results, for each experimental scenario,
we enumerate all possible combinations of vehicles entering
and exiting the road network, and then calculate the average
travel time, average waiting time, and average travel distance
of vehicles through the road network, and use these three
indexes as the evaluation index of experimental results.

waiting time of the paths planned by A2C, DQN, and RPU are
reduced compared with the traditional methods, and the two
schemes, A2C and DQN, which consider traffic lights, have
reduced the travel time and average waiting time compared
with the RPU method, which does not consider traffic lights.
Waiting time is further reduced. In particular, after taking into
account the effect of traffic lights on path planning, the average
waiting time is significantly reduced for both A2C and DQN
compared to RPU without taking into account traffic lights.
The main reason is that the A2C: algorithm has better learning

C. Compared Methods
SDN-Enabled Approach for Vehicle Path-Planning
(SEARCH) [9] uses 5G base stations and UAVs (Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles) to sense traffic changes on surrounding roads
and build a global view of road traffic status. Then, the traffic
volume of each road section is counted, the travel time of
each road section is estimated by the model, and finally, the
shortest path is calculated using the Dijkstra algorithm.
Route Planning Using Dynamic Programming in Reinforcement Learning (RPU) [13] requires prior design of the
road network structure and state transfer probabilities in the
environment to avoid unnecessary exploration during the reinforcement learning training process, and finally plans the
shortest path for the vehicle by reinforcement learning.
Deep Q-Learning Network for Vehicle Path Planning [14]is
a reinforcement learning method based on action values, where
the action values are fitted by a neural network. For DQN, the
action with the highest action value will be selected in the
testing phase. The A2C algorithm is a policy gradient-based
algorithm, unlike Q-Learning, which learns the optimal policy
directly while interacting with the environment.
Since the time for a vehicle to pass through the entire road
network area is the sum of the travel time on the road and the
time spent waiting for traffic lights, we use the A2C method
for path planning and take into account the effect of traffic
light status on path planning so that our deep reinforcement
learning model can learn a policy with a shorter travel time.

Fig. 5. Variation of average travel time with traffic light duration

D. Experimental results analysis
To evaluate the effectiveness of our method after considering
the effect of signals on the path planning results, we set the
signal duration to 10s, 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s,
and 100s during the experiments. The experimental results
are evaluated by several indexes, such as average travel time,
average waiting time, and average travel distance.
Fig. 5 shows the variation of the average travel time with
traffic light duration for different methods when different
durations of traffic lights are set in the network. Fig. 6 shows
the variation of the average waiting time with traffic light
duration for different methods when the different traffic light
durations are set in the network. Fig. 7 shows the variation
of the average distance traveled by the different methods with
respect to the traffic light duration when the traffic lights in the
network are set to different durations. From the following three
figures, we can see that the average travel time and average

Fig. 6. Variation of average waiting time with traffic light duration

ability and robustness than the DQN (deep Q-Learning )
algorithm in the path planning scenario. The main reason is
that in the reward setting, we are looking for a shorter travel
time and waiting time, so the agent will bypass the shorter but
congested paths and look for longer but shorter travel times
during the training and execution process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7. Variation of average travel distance with traffic light duration

[6] Colorni A, Dorigo M, Maniezzo V. Distributed Optimization by Ant
Colonies[C]// Proceedings of ECAL91 - European Conference on Artificial Life. 1991.
[7] Nazari M, Oroojlooy A, Snyder L, et al. Reinforcement learning for
solving the vehicle routing problem[J]. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2018, 31.
[8] Koh S, Zhou B, Fang H, et al. Real-time deep reinforcement learning
based vehicle navigation[J]. Applied Soft Computing, 2020, 96: 106694.
[9] Oubbati O S, Atiquzzaman M, Lorenz P, et al. SEARCH: An SDNenabled approach for vehicle path-planning[J]. IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 2020, 69(12): 14523-14536.
[10] Mnih V, Badia A P, Mirza M, et al. Asynchronous methods for
deep reinforcement learning[C]//International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2016: 1928-1937.
[11] Sutton, R.S., McAllester, D.A., Singh, S.P., Mansour, Y., et al.: Policy
gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In: NIPs, vol. 99, pp. 1057–1063. Citeseer (1999)
[12] Mnih, V., et al.: Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928–1937.
PMLR (2016)
[13] Peng N, Xi Y, Rao J, et al. Urban Multiple Route Planning Model
Using Dynamic Programming in Reinforcement Learning[J]. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2021.
[14] Osband I, Blundell C, Pritzel A, et al. Deep exploration via bootstrapped
DQN[J]. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2016, 29.

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a path planning method based
on traffic light status and real-time traffic flow information.
The method is based on the deep reinforcement learning A2C
model, in which intelligent vehicles perceive the traffic density
of each road section and the traffic light status of each intersection and plan the shortest path in real-time through the A2C
model. Our method has some limitations. The experiments
are conducted on the SUMO simulation platform, and some
simplifications are made compared with real road conditions,
such as ignoring the effects of pedestrians, traffic accidents,
and other factors. In the future, we will consider the impact of
pedestrians and traffic accidents on path planning and optimize
our algorithm to make the model more suitable for real traffic
scenarios.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was in part supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 62272357, 62176194),
Key Research and Development Program of Hubei (No.
2022BAA052), Key Research and Development Program
of Hainan (No. ZDYF2021GXJS014), Science Foundation
of Chongqing of China (cstc2021jcyj-msxm4262), Research
Project of Chongqing Research Institute, Wuhan University of
Technology (ZD2021-04, ZL2021-05).
R EFERENCES
[1] Y . Wang et al., “Analysing the spatial configuration of urban bus
networks based on the geospatial network analysis method,” Cities, vol.
96, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 102406, doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2019.102406.
[2] R. W. Floyd, “Algorithm 97: Shortest path,” Commun. ACM, v o l . 5
, no. 6, p. 345, Jun. 1962.
[3] P. Hart, N. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern.,
vol. SSC-4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, Oct. 1968.
[4] A. Stentz, “Optimal and efficient path planning for partially known
environments,” in Intelligent Unmanned Ground Vehicles. San Diego,
CA, USA: Springer, 1997, pp. 203–220.
[5] S. Koenig and M. Likhachev, “D* lite,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 15, 2002,
pp. 476–483.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:56:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

