2025 IEEE 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (CICT) | 979-8-3315-7249-5/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CICT67193.2025.11399143

Situation-aware Path Optimization for Autonomous
Systems: A Deep Reinforcement Learning based
Approach
P. Sri Ashritha
Dept of CSE

Srija Nandamuri
Dept of CSE

Yarra Venkata Vijay
Dept of CSE

Preeth Raguraman
Dept of CSE

IIITDM Kancheepuram
Chennai , India
sriashrithapendekanti@gmail.com

IIITDM Kancheepuram
Chennai , India
srijanandamuri@gmail.com

IIITDM Kancheepuram
Chennai , India
yarravijay2005@gmail.com

IIITDM Kancheepuram
Chennai , India
preeth@iiitdm.ac.in

Koppala Guravaiah
Dept of CSE
IIIT Kottayam
Kottayam , India
kguravaiah@iiitkottayam.ac.in

Abstract—Intelligent Route Optimization (IRO) addresses autonomous navigation in dynamic urban environments by combining real-time machine learning, probabilistic modeling, and
adaptive simulation into a seamless routing framework. Unlike
traditional approaches that depend on static maps or simple
shortest-path algorithms, IRO actively integrates live contextual
data, such as time, weather, road state, and events, using neural
networks to achieve highly accurate traffic state predictions with
minimal input features. These predictions are further refined
by Hidden Markov Models to ensure consistency and reliability,
especially during abrupt transitions or anomalies in traffic.
Building on this stabilized foundation, a Deep Reinforcement
Learning agent equipped with a deep Q-network evaluates a
broad action space, selecting routes that optimize not only for
speed but also for risk, congestion, and environmental safety
across various transport modes. For every potential path, IRO
invokes adaptive Monte Carlo sampling to quantify travel time
variability and the probability of events that could impact
the route, thus assigning a reliability measure alongside the
expected travel time and suggested route. With a modular
pipeline that separates prediction, smoothing, policy selection,
and uncertainty quantification, IRO is able to rapidly adapt to
new environments, technologies, and data sources. It consistently
outperforms classical shortest-path methods, as demonstrated by
its 96.06% accuracy on a custom urban dataset, delivering more
reliable results in the presence of outliers such as traffic surges,
harsh weather, or road closures. The proposed method empowers
autonomous systems to navigate urban settings with a high
degree of resilience and transparency, providing interpretable
recommendations that specify not just which route to take, but
why, bridging rigorous AI modeling with practical, real-time
urban mobility needs.

Index Terms—Route Optimization, Intelligent Transportation
Systems, Deep Q-Network, Hidden Markov Model, Travel Time
Prediction, Uncertainty Modeling

I. I NTRODUCTION
Smart city transport systems need route planning that adapts
to context, not just static maps or simple shortest-path methods. Classical algorithms like Dijkstra’s and A* work on fixed
graphs but fail under real-world uncertainties like traffic, road
damage, weather, or events. Autonomous vehicles also don’t
use live internet maps like Google Maps; instead, they rely
on high-definition static maps with past road data and local
sensing. Addressing how such static, history-based navigation
can be enhanced to adapt dynamically under uncertainty is the
central focus of this paper. Researchers address these challenges with probabilistic and learning-based models. PTDR
uses statistics and Monte Carlo simulations to model travel
time distributions, giving probability-based arrival times, while
Vitali et al. scaled this with high-performance computing for
city-wide routing. Yet, limitations remain: (1) road segments
are modeled independently, ignoring temporal correlations; (2)
route selection is often static or rule-based; and (3) simulations
handle uncertainty but lack feedback from history and realtime data. This paper introduces a unified and modular framework for smarter route planning, designed to be both powerful
and easy to understand. The system brings together several layers of intelligence: supervised neural networks to predict traffic
conditions, a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to track how
congestion evolves over time, a deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) agent to choose the best routes under uncertainty, and
Monte Carlo simulations with adaptive sampling to estimate
travel times more accurately. Unlike black-box systems, IRO
approach is transparent, providing clear outputs such as route
confidence levels, safety and efficiency scores, and explainable
decision steps. Its modular design keeps prediction, estimation,
decision-making, and scoring separate, making it easier to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tune, debug, and improve. With a built-in feedback loop, the
framework continuously learns and adapts, while adjusting
its simulations and route choices to match changing traffic
patterns.The Monte Carlo methods and fast neural inference,
it can scale from large traffic control centers to lightweight
modules in autonomous vehicles. Beyond everyday traffic, the
framework is also adaptable to high-stakes scenarios like urban
crime interception, where real-time, pursuit-aware routing is
critical.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Route optimization in intelligent transportation systems
has gradually evolved from traditional deterministic shortestpath methods to probabilistic and learning-based approaches
capable of handling real-world uncertainties and dynamic
traffic conditions. As an initial step, stochastic methods were
examined for capturing variability in travel times. Based on the
work of S.Ahmad et al. [1], developed a Markov chain–based
approach for route recommendation, probabilistic state transitions were recognized that could capture user preferences
and travel uncertainties, providing a foundation for modeling
traffic behaviors in routing decisions.
To incorporate temporal dynamics, the capabilities of Hidden Markov Models(HMMs) were leveraged. Goh et. al.
[2] has applied HMMs for online map matching to handle
noisy GPS trajectories, a similar probabilistic framework was
adopted to infer traffic states from sensor data. In [3], the
author has extended this idea with a second-order HMM
incorporating road hierarchy, vehicle heading, and driver preferences, highlighting the importance of modeling multiple contextual features to improve accuracy in dense urban networks.
Y. Zheng et al. [4],proposed a model that integrates driver
path preferences into transition probabilities, HMMs were
applied to estimate segment-level speed distributions (mean
and variance), forming the basis for travel time prediction.
These studies collectively motivated the use of HMMs for
temporal smoothing and state transition modeling in IRO
pipeline, going beyond localization toward predictive route
optimization.
With segment-level probabilistic speeds obtained from
HMMs, Monte Carlo simulations were implemented to estimate total travel times under uncertainty. F. Vitali et al.[7]
demonstrated that adaptive Monte Carlo sampling could efficiently generate travel time distributions while maintaining
accuracy, and Authors [8] confirmed its robustness in largescale traffic networks.An adaptive sampling approach was
adopted dynamically adjusting the number of samples based
on route volatility using the coefficient of variation (CV),
ensuring computational efficiency while accurately capturing
uncertainty.
Recognizing that traffic patterns and routing decisions depend on multiple modes of transport, the system was extended
to handle cars, bikes, and walking. To further refine predictions, a hybrid Bayesian–HMM smoothing mechanism was
integrated, similar in spirit to the probabilistic inference frameworks suggested in prior studies [5,6,13,16]. This allowed us to

maintain posterior beliefs over traffic states for each segment at
any time, supporting dynamic, context-aware route estimation.
For adaptive route selection under dynamic traffic conditions,reinforcement learning (RL) was incorporated. Building
on the stochastic motion planning and traffic light management
work of Authors [9,14,15,18], who optimized the probability
of on-time arrival under uncertain delays, and the attentionbased RL architectures applied by D. Iklassov et al.[10] to
vehicle routing with time windows, deep RL was used to learn
route selection policies that adapt to real-time traffic patterns.
Finally, recognizing safety-critical scenarios, such as emergency vehicle routing, real-time adaptability was incorporated
into IRO framework. In [11,12,17,19], who proposed traffic
signal preemption strategies and decentralized RL frameworks
for emergency vehicle passage, IRO pipeline ensures that
adaptive route optimization accounts for both efficiency and
critical time constraints.
III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
The proposed framework, IRO addresses the limitations
of static route planning through dynamic, uncertainty-aware
optimization. IRO directly infers dynamic features such as day,
time, and destination to predict key traffic-related variables.
It simultaneously estimates vehicle count (regression), road
condition (classification), and weather condition (classification), thereby forming a unified multi-output traffic prediction
pipeline. The proposed approach integrates neural networks
(NN), Hidden Markov Models (HMM), reinforcement learning
(RL), and Monte Carlo (MC) techniques, with HMM and
MC methods already addressed in prior studies. The complete
schematic of the pipeline is shown in Figure 1

Fig. 1: Schematic Diagram of the Intelligent Route Optimization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Vehicle Count Prediction and Road and Weather Condition
Prediction
The number of vehicles in terms of count is modeled
using an XGBRegressor with 100 estimators. The regressor
constructs an additive ensemble of decision trees, learning a
mapping
K
X
fXGB (X) =
fk (X),
k=1

to minimize the squared error objective with regularization.
This approach enables the model to capture complex nonlinear relationships and interactions between temporal, spatial,
and contextual features, providing accurate estimates of the
expected traffic volume. Road and weather conditions are predicted using a CatBoostClassifier, a gradient-boosted decision
tree ensemble optimized for categorical inputs. The model
outputs class probabilities via a softmax function:
exp(Fk (X))
,
P (yc = k | X) = PC
j=1 exp(Fj (X))
and is trained to minimize the cross-entropy loss. With a depth
of 6,200 iterations, and a learning rate of 0.1, the model
captures non-linear feature interactions, handles categorical
variables natively, and mitigates overfitting.
B. Neural Network-Based Traffic Predictor
The predicted vehicle counts and categorical road/weather
states serve as inputs for Neural Network models. The Neural Network-based Traffic Predictor employs a multi-layer
feedforward architecture with an input layer corresponding to 8 features: start node, end node, time, day, vehicle
count, weather, road condition, and special event. This is
followed by three fully connected hidden layers of dimensions [128, 64, 32], each using Batch Normalization, ReLU
activation, and Dropout (rate = 0.3) to prevent overfitting.
The network concludes with a 3-neuron softmax output layer
for traffic state classification.Training utilizes CrossEntropyLoss optimized via the Adam optimizer with learning rate
η = 10−3 , where the loss function is defined as

Traffic profiles (mean severity, high-traffic ratio, traffic
variance),
• Environmental conditions (normalized time, vehicle
count, special event indicators).
The network utilizes a 3-layer fully connected architecture
with ReLU activations, and dropout regularization rate of 0.2).
The details of the hidden dimensions is [256, 128, 64].
The multi-objective reward function is defined as
•

R = α1 · (−time) + α2 · speed + α3 · (−queue) + α4 · safety,
balancing travel efficiency, congestion penalties, and safety
considerations. Queue penalties are derived from traffic severity scores, while safety bonuses incorporate contextual risk
factors such as weather conditions, road quality, and temporal
factors.
Training employs experience replay with buffer size 10,000,
batch size 32, target network updates every 100 steps, and
ϵ-greedy exploration where ϵ decays exponentially from 1.0
to 0.01 with decay rate 0.995. Optimization is performed
using Adam with learning rate 10−3 and gradient clipping
(max norm = 1.0) for stability.
The Q-network approximates expected cumulative discounted rewards:
#
"∞
X
k
Q(st , at ) ≈ E
γ rt+k st , at ,
k=0

and updates using the Bellman equation:
Q(st , at ) = rt + γ · max
Qtarget (st+1 , a′ ),
′
a

with mean squared error loss between predicted and target
Q-values. Once the DQN selects the best route, travel times
were estimated for three different modes of transport using the
Monte Carlo approach described earlier, accounting for traffic
variability and uncertainty. This workflow diagram shown in
Figure 2, shows the data flow that encompasses the integration
of neural networks, HMMs, and deep reinforcement learning
to predict traffic states.

exy
L(x, y) = − log P xj ,
je
which combines LogSoftmax and NLLLoss for mutually exclusive classification. Training proceeds for 100 epochs with
a 20% validation split.
C. HMM and Reinforcement Learning Based Path Selection
The predicted traffic states are then passed into the Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) to model the traffic sequence from
start to end. These HMM-processed states are fed into the
Deep Q-Network (DQN) reinforcement learning agent, named
PathSelectionDQN, which operates on a 10-dimensional
state vector encoding:
• Path statistics (average length, min/max path length, path
diversity),

Fig. 2: Workflow diagram of the proposed technique

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 DQN-Based Path Selection

D. Dataset
The dataset was designed to model urban traffic by incorporating the real-time parameters. Each road segment is defined
by start and end nodes, capturing directional flow, and each
record represents traffic at a specific time with contextual
features: day, timestamp, vehicle counts, weather (no rain,
slow rain, normal rain, snow), road quality (poor to better),
and special events like closures or gatherings.
During validation,some inconsistencies were found: Nighttime counts (12-3 am) were unrealistically high, while morning
rush hrs (7-10 am) were unusually low, probably due to sensor
errors, correcting them by normalizing nighttime counts using
statistical priors and smoothing peak hrs counts based on
nearby times and segments.
Feature engineering: road conditions were converted into ordered categories, weather systematically encoded, and vehicle
counts clustered into traffic states (low, medium, high) using
K-means.
The final curated dataset contains 15,120 validated records,
providing training data for the neural network traffic classifier,
historical sequences for HMM estimation, scenarios for reinforcement learning, and calibration for Monte Carlo travel time
simulations. This careful curation ensures clean, representative
data that reflects real urban traffic dynamics while remaining
robust to measurement noise and temporal inconsistencies.
E. Code Integration Layer
The DQN algorithm employed for path selection is summarized as follows:
This algorithm enables adaptive routing by learning to
balance travel time, congestion penalties, and safety based on
dynamic traffic states, providing robust route selection under
uncertainty.

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:

y = rt + γ · max
Qtarget (st+1 , a′ )
′
a

18:

19:
20:
21:
22:
23:

•

A. Accuracy and F1 Score for Traffic Classification
•

Baseline (Neural Network Only): Achieved an accuracy
of 87.4% and an F1 score of 0.84, indicating solid initial
performance in classifying traffic states.

Update Q-network by minimizing loss:
L = (Q(st , at ) − y)

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
The proposed model, (i.e, IRO) focuses to predict the
vehicle count, road condition, and weather using only date,
day, time, start node, end node, and special event indicators
as input features. The dataset contained 15,120 validated
records capturing diverse traffic scenarios. The vehicle count
model, implemented with an XGBRegressor, achieved strong
predictive performance with a mean absolute error (MAE)
of 19.74, a root mean squared error (RMSE) of 24.57, and
an R² score of 0.7303. The road condition classifier, using
CatBoostClassifier, obtained an accuracy of 79.50%, while
the weather classifier achieved an accuracy of 63.69%. These
results demonstrate that IRO method can reliably infer critical
traffic context variables from minimal input features, providing
enriched information for downstream routing and optimization
modules.

Input: Current traffic state from HMM, 10-dimensional
state vector
Output: Optimal route from sIROce to destination
Initialization:
Initialize experience replay buffer (size = 10,000)
Initialize target network
Set learning rate η = 10−3 , exploration rate ϵ = 1.0,
discount factor γ = 0.99
while not converged do
Observe current state st
if random action with probability ϵ then
at ← random action
else
at ← arg maxa Q(st , a)
end if
Execute action at , observe reward rt , and next state
st+1
Store (st , at , rt , st+1 ) in experience replay buffer
Sample mini-batch (batch size = 32) from buffer
Compute target Q-value:

2

Perform gradient clipping (max norm = 1.0)
Periodically update target network every 100 steps
Decay ϵ: ϵ ← ϵ × 0.995
end while
Select optimal path based on learned Q-values

With HMM Smoothing: Accuracy improved to 96.06%,
and the F1 score increased to 0.89. This improvement
is particularly notable in correcting misclassifications
during state transitions, such as rush hIRO periods,
demonstrating the effectiveness of HMM smoothing in
refining predictions.

B. Prediction Stability
•

•

Before HMM: Predictions lacked stability, especially at
state transition points, leading to higher variability in
classification outcomes.
After HMM: The incorporation of HMM smoothing
significantly enhanced prediction stability, as evidenced
by a reduced variance in Monte Carlo simulations:
2
2
2
2
σwithout
HMM ≈ 8.7 min , σwith HMM ≈ 3.9 min ,

particularly beneficial in complex scenarios such as industrial zones and traffic bottlenecks.
C. Monte Carlo Variance Reduction via Adaptive Sampling
Monte Carlo simulations, used for route ETA prediction,
were conducted 1,000 times per route. The mean ETA prediction error was approximately ±3.2 minutes. The adaptive

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Monte Carlo module thus combines uncertainty profiling,
quantile-based robustness, and sorted sampling for intelligent,
scalable route evaluation. Refer to Figures 3, 4, and 5 for
Monte Carlo-based travel time distributions showing 95th
percentiles of 26.4 min (Car mode), 33.6 min (Bike mode),
and 260 min (Walk mode), respectively.

Fig. 3: Monte Carlo-based travel time distribution for Car
mode: 95th percentile at 26.4 min.

D. Evaluation
•

•

Neural Network (NN): The traffic predictor achieved
a validation accuracy of 96.06% with HMM smoothing,
up from 87.4% without HMM, reflecting significant improvement in classification performance.
Reinforcement Learning (RL): The RL policy demonstrated substantial improvement, where the average cumulative reward per episode increased from −300 to
+65 over 500 episodes. The success rate for optimally
reaching the destination rose to 92% with RL, compared
to 76% using static Dijkstra’s algorithm. Convergence
stabilized around episode 150, with only minor enhancements observed thereafter.

As observed, the difference between Monte Carlo estimates
and baseline times increases with the slowness of the mode,
especially prominent in walking, where exposure to dynamic
factors is prolonged. For the car and bike modes, the variance is smaller but still significant, signaling moderate traffic
volatility. Overall, Monte Carlo outputs consistently produce
conservative yet reliable buffers, making them a robust tool
for high-stakes routing under uncertainty.
E. Path Selection (RL-based Approach vs. Dijkstra’s Approach)

Fig. 4: Monte Carlo-based travel time distribution for Bike
mode: 95th percentile at 33.6 min.

Dijkstra’s algorithm selected the path [1, 2, 6] covering 5.00
km via edges 1 → 2 (2.0 km) and 2 → 6 (3.0 km), minimizing
distance with a deterministic travel time of 12.17 minutes at a
constant speed of 50 km/h under low traffic conditions. This
approach does not account for dynamic traffic factors.
In contrast, the Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent, trained
over 500 episodes, selected the path [1, 3, 6] covering 5.50
km via edges 1 → 3 (3.0 km) and 3 → 6 (2.5 km).
Although longer in distance, this selection reflects rush-hIRO
congestion, HMM-smoothed traffic predictions, and risk-aware
decision-making. The 95th percentile Monte Carlo estimate of
travel time for the RL-selected path was 26.37 minutes, as
it deliberately avoided node 2’s congestion and favored node
3’s stability. Policy statistics—ϵ = 0.0807, average reward =
0.4068—confirmed convergence.
Thus, while slower in distance and nominal time, the RLbased route emphasizes reliability under uncertainty, showcasing its clear advantage over static shortest-path strategies.
F. Bayes vs Neural Network

Fig. 5: Monte Carlo-based travel time distribution for Walk
mode: 95th percentile at 260 min.

The Neural Network achieved a validation accuracy of
96.06% on 15,120 samples, effectively capturing complex
non-linear relationships. XGBoost reached a test accuracy
of 76.85% with a macro F1-score of 0.74, demonstrating
moderate performance. Overall, Neural Networks outperform
both Bayesian models and XGBoost due to their ability to
model intricate feature dependencies and non-linear patterns
more robustly.
•

Bayesian Model : Converges faster but with early high
uncertainty.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I: Performance Evaluation of proposed method across
three datasets
Metric
Traffic Predictor Accuracy (%)
Final Validation Loss (NN)
Final Training Loss (NN)
RL Path Selection Accuracy (%)
Average RL Reward
Average RL Loss
RL Episodes Trained
RL Final Epsilon

Dataset 1 (1848)
89.45
0.6583
0.6618
100
0.1578
0.0121
500
0.0816

Dataset 2 (3528)
87.82
0.6953
0.7049
100
0.2717
0.0037
1000
0.01

Dataset 3 (7896)
87.50
0.6925
0.7070
100
0.1460
0.0120
1000
0.009

deployments, handling rare or outlier real world events, and
testing transferability to diverse cities or larger networks will
further strengthen applicability. Exploring partial observability,
external data sets and comprehensive studies can enhance
reliability, while continuing attention to ethical and practical
implementation issues will ensure real-world feasibility. These
future developments will further advance the impact and
scalability of the IRO approach.
R EFERENCES

Neural Network : Loss decreases smoothly from approximately 0.17 to 0.005, demonstrating stable learning
while capturing complex non-linear relationships.
• XGBoost : Shows moderate convergence behavior compared to the other two.
This comparison reinforces the strength of Neural Networks
for traffic state prediction in dynamic and uncertain environments.
Table I shows the performance of the IRO models perform
across three datasets of increasing size (DS1: 1848, DS2: 4212,
DS3: 7896 samples). The neural network (NN) stays highly
accurate, dropping only slightly from 89.45% to 87.50%,
which indicates it generalizes well even as the data gets
more complex. Its training and validation losses remain low
and consistent, reflecting stable learning without overfitting.
The RL agent performs best on DS2, suggesting it learns
optimal path strategies most effectively with moderate data,
while RL loss decreases on larger datasets, showing improved
policy refinement. Epsilon values drop as dataset size grows,
meaning the agent confidently exploits what it has learned.
Impressively, the RL agent achieves 100% path selection
precision across all datasets in a fully observable environment,
demonstrating reliable convergence. Overall, both NN and RL
show consistent and dependable performance across datasets
and simulations.
In this study, the RL success rate measures how often
the agent selects the path with the lowest composite cost,
considering travel time, safety, and efficiency not just the
shortest ETA. Performance was evaluated on both validation
and unseen test routes to ensure generalization. To capture
travel-time reliability, mean and median Monte Carlo times
were recorded alongside the 95th percentile. The model
achieved 96.06% classification accuracy and a 0.89 F1-score
on a held-out validation set, with evaluations on unseen routes
confirming stable, generalizable performance. The safety score
is a relative risk indicator derived from traffic, weather, and
road conditions, providing context aware guidance rather than
an absolute measure. Overall, these results demonstrate that
the framework delivers reliable, risk-aware, and adaptable
route planning under real world uncertainties.
•

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This work demonstrates strong accuracy and robustness for
urban traffic routing using IRO hybrid framework; however,
future directions remain. Broader validation, including live

[1] S. Ahmad, I. Ullah, F. Mehmood, M. Fayaz, and D. Kim, “A stochastic
approach towards travel route optimization and recommendation based
on users constraints using Markov chain,” IEEE Access, 2020.
[2] C. Y. Goh, J. Dauwels, N. Mitrovic, M. T. Asif, A. Oran, and P. Jaillet,
“Online map-matching based on Hidden Markov Model for real-time
traffic sensing applications,” in IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Conference (ITSC), 2012, doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2012.6338825.
[3] Y. Fu, “An online map matching algorithm based on second-order
Hidden Markov Model,” JIROnal of Advanced Transportation, 2021.
[4] Y. Zheng, X. Lin, and H. Zhang, “Hidden Markov Model and driver
path preference for floating car trajectory map matching,” IET Intelligent
Transport Systems, 2018.
[5] X. Sun, H. Liu, and J. Lu, “Dynamic stochastic shortest path problem
in transportation networks,” Transportation Research Part B, 2006.
[6] X. Chen, X. Liu, and F. Wang, “Real-time traffic information based vehicle routing using stochastic models,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2013.
[7] F. Vitali, A. Golasowski, and K. Zhang, “Efficient Monte Carlo-Based
Probabilistic Time-Dependent Routing with Adaptive Sampling,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 2019, arXiv preprint.
[8] A. Golasowski, S. Brak, and M. Kowalski, “Performance evaluation of
Monte Carlo-based time-dependent routing,” in Proceedings of CISIM,
2016, SpringerLink.
[9] B. Lim, S. Park, and C. Lee, “Stochastic motion planning for traffic
navigation,” International JIROnal of Robotics Research, 2011.
[10] D. Iklassov, M. Song, and P. Liu, “Reinforcement Learning for Solving
Stochastic Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research (ACML), 2024.
[11] Y. Mu, D. Song, and L. Liu, “Route-Based Signal Preemption Control
of Emergency Vehicle,” JIROnal of Control Science and Engineering,
2018.
[12] L. Su, K. Zhang, and H. Chen, “EMVLight: A Decentralized Reinforcement Learning Framework for Efficient Passage of Emergency Vehicles,”
arXiv, 2021.
[13] M. Li, Z. Wang, F. Liu, and J. Li, “Federated deep reinforcement
learning-based urban traffic signal control,” Scientific Reports, vol. 15,
no. 6721, 2025
[14] W.L. Shang, A. Hassan, and L. Zhu, “The impact of deep reinforcement
learning-based traffic signal control: integrating cooperative vehicleinfrastructure systems,” Applied Energy, vol. 358, p. 122613, 2025.
[15] B. Medina-Salgado, F. Bousetouane, and L. Mo, “Urban traffic flow prediction techniques: A review,” Environmental Technology Innovation,
vol. 27, p. 102147, 2022.
[16] H. Qi, W. Zhao, L. Wang, C. Xu, and Z. Li, “Deep reinforcement
learning for dynamic vehicle routing problem with time windows,”
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
vol. 180, p. 103768, 2025.
[17] G.Palermo,A.Golasowski,M.Vitali, and K.Zhang,“An Efficient Monte
Carlo-Based Probabilistic Time-Dependent Routing Calculation Targeting a Server-Side Car Navigation System,”Expert Systems with
Applications,vol.126,pp.68-81,2021
[18] A. Merbah and J. Ben-Othman, “Optimizing Traffic Flow With Reinforcement Learning: A Study on Traffic Light Management,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 25, no. 5, pp.
3964-3977, 2024.
[19] X.Y. Liu, M. Zhu, S. Borst, and A. Walid, “Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Traffic Light Control in Intelligent Transportation Systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. XX, no.
XX, 2025.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

