2021 6th International Conference on UK-China Emerging Technologies

A Communication Resource Enhanced Intelligent
Road Trafﬁc Routing Scheme
Zekun Cheng, Xiwen Liao, Supeng Leng and Haoye Chai

2021 International Conference on UK-China Emerging Technologies (UCET) | 978-1-6654-9575-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/UCET54125.2021.9674959

School of Information and Communication Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
Chengdu, China
{zkcheng, xwliao}@std.uestc.edu.cn, spleng@uestc.edu.cn, haoyechai@163.com

Abstract—Route planning plays a key role in improving transportation efﬁciency. Collaborative route based on information
sharing will be the trend in the near future. However, existing
route planing schemes ignore the limitations of communication
bandwidth and the same planing strategy are provided for all
vehicles based on current trafﬁc conditions which results in
trafﬁc congestion. In this paper, we propose a route planning
optimization scheme with the aid of communication resource,
which provides secure and efﬁcient route planning services for
trafﬁc network. To model the road transportation network, we
propose a maximum trafﬁc density model for safe driving in
a road segment based on the Preceding-Reaction time (PRT).
Considering the spatial and temporal correlation of the trafﬁc
network and the multi-agent features, a Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient based Trafﬁc Self-evolution (MTSE)
algorithm is proposed. Simulation experiments are conducted to
compare the performance of our algorithm with some existing
route planing methods. Simulation results demonstrate that the
proposed model can reduce system congestion effectively and
improve transportation efﬁciency.
Keywords —Route planing, Internet of Vehicles, Safety
distance, Reinforcement Learning, Self evolution

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the growing number of vehicles, trafﬁc congestion
becomes a serious problem and degrade the trafﬁc efﬁciency
for urban transportation system[1]. According to the latest
report, the average speed of vehicles during the rush hours
commute is only 24.36 km/h in Beijing, which reﬂects the
importance of transportation planning and management in
congestion management. There are two primary categories
of congestion management: distributed trafﬁc navigation and
centralized trafﬁc ﬂow scheduling. Distributed trafﬁc navigation is more common in personal travel scenarios, such
as trafﬁc intelligence navigation systems and driver-empirical
trips, which are characterized by high personal satisfaction and
low system optimization. Centralized trafﬁc ﬂow scheduling
can reduce congestion, while due to the load balancing of the
road network, driving experience of vehicles will be sacriﬁced.
In recent years, with the accelerated development of the
internet of vehicles (IoV) and autonomous vehicles, an urban
This work is partly supported by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (Grant Number: 2018YFE0117500), National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant Number: 62171104) and the EU H2020
Project COSAFE (Grant Number: MSCA-RISE-2018-824019).

978-1-6654-9575-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

transportation system allows real-time trafﬁc status information to be quickly exchanged and shared among vehicles, roadside units and data centers, which brings beneﬁts to reduction
of trafﬁc collisions and improve trafﬁc safety. Speciﬁcally, 5GV2X communication facilitates the real-time trafﬁc information exchanging between vehicles and infrastructure[2]. The
most common ways of combining IoV and trafﬁc management
includes trafﬁc light regulation based on trafﬁc conditions
and intelligent route planning schemes. The former that rely
only on microscopic information of road sections to relieve
congestion pressure is not effective in real-life scenarios.
For route planing, appropriate navigation can improve transportation efﬁciency with the help of IoV technology. On the
one hand, infrastructure (e.g. roadside units, RSU) distributed
on the road need to satisfy the basic safety operations of
autonomous driving services and road condition monitoring.
In other words, the route planing strategies need to consider
communication resource constraints when trafﬁc ﬂow density
is high to keep V2X service stability. Trafﬁc can also be
diverted in advance by congestion prediction[3] [4]. On the
other hand, the sharing of trafﬁc state information does not
include the planning strategies. The asymmetric and local
aspects of shared information lead to unnecessary congestion
as the optimal path under the current decision is ﬂooded with
many vehicles that have adopted the same planning route.
Route planing is mainly classiﬁed to traditional and deep
learning based methods. Rachmawati et al. proposed an algorithm combines Breadth-First Search (BFS) and Depth
First Search (DFS)[5]. Shan et al. used DFS algorithm with
considering the complexity of travelers preference factors and
the time dependence of route feature vector under Cooperative
Vehicle-Infrastructure System[6]. Jia et al. proposed an urban
trafﬁc congestion evacuation route optimization method based
on particle swarm optimization, which select the layout of
the evacuation route according to the different connectivity of
the indicators[7]. Sumon et al. proposed a scalable dynamic
route planning approach based on A∗ search algorithm which
leveraged VANET’s (Vehicular Ad Hoc Network) information
to use real-time trafﬁc information to update vehicle routes[8].
Chen et al. proposed a decentralized framework that enables
dynamic orchestration of route planning and trafﬁc signal
timing, which ﬁnd the Nash equilibria for the evolutionary

158

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. A route planing structure based on ITS.

game to improve trafﬁc efﬁciency[9]. Nie et al. used ant
colony optimization with the assistance of VANET[10]. These
schemes based on traditional algorithm only give optimal
routes based on current trafﬁc conditions, so if all vehicles
rely on these schemes to plan their routes, they may get stuck
in congestion caused by emerging trafﬁc clusters. Xu et al.
capture a typical set of congestion road features from the GPS
trajectories, which include trafﬁc volume, road speed limit
and route distance etc. Then select the the best alternative
route by a deep learning model from top-k candidate alternate
routes[11]. Li et al. proposed a double rewarded value iteration
network (VIN) to fully learn the experienced drivers’ routing
decisions, which are based on their implicitly estimated trafﬁc
trends[12]. However, in current research work, IoV resources
have not been considered as a assistance capability to improve
trafﬁc efﬁciency.
To solve the problems above, a conversion mechanism from
communication resources to trafﬁc capacity is proposed, where
in the communication and braking process of front and rear
vehicles are analyzed. Then we exploit a self-evolution scheme
based MADDPG to improve the stability of the training environment.The main contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows:
•

•

•

With the assistance of IoV that enhances trafﬁc efﬁciency,
we proposed a trafﬁc ﬂow model considering communication process and congestion analysis between vehicles
to represent the macro trafﬁc ﬂow and road network
characteristics.
To minimize the total travel time, a joint routing scheme
is proposed based on our trafﬁc ﬂow model with the aid
of IoV. The scheme takes account into current trafﬁc
conditions and long-term effects in the collaborative
autonomous driving system to avoid trafﬁc congestion
due to the same routes planned by massive vehicles.
We propose a multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient with trafﬁc self-evolution (MTSE) algorithm to solve
the above formulated NP-hard problem. Our algorithm
takes all vehicles and current trafﬁc condition as input,

which perform iterative evolution to evaluate the system
performance in terms of long-term planning. The travel
demand also can be satisﬁed. Meanwhile, the congestion
time and travel timeout can be reduced signiﬁcantly.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL A ND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
This paper aims to improve the travel efﬁciency of autonomous vehicles in urban intelligent transportation system
scenarios and reduce the congestion scale effect due to scheme
duplication. In addition to traditional trafﬁc elements such as
road length, road speed limit, origin and destination when
performing route planning, IoV communication resources supporting autonomous vehicle services should also be taken into
consideration as road conditions. In this paper, we take basic
safety alert service as the main service of autonomous driving
services. We ﬁrst characterize and model road scenario to correlate the communication resources with the trafﬁc resources
and the inﬂuencing factors for planning. Then we analyze
the problem to propose scheme optimization to minimize the
total travel time in the system. To solve this problem we
formulate an optimization scheme model shown in Fig. 1,
which includes a data collection module, an agent decision
module, an evaluation module, and a global experience pool.
A. The Route Planing Structure Based on ITS
Fig. 1 illustrates the process of ITS-based distributed path
planning in a realistic scenario. The agent of each autonomous
vehicle is responsible for V2V communication with the vehicles in front and behind to ensure the safe distance between
vehicles on the one hand, and communication with RSU to
interact with decision information and environment state on
the other hand. RSU is responsible for collecting road state
information and online planning decisions of each agent and
reporting the data to the ITS central server. The ITS central
server is responsible for storing the global pool of experience
of the system and and integrate it as training data to be returned
to the agent’s critic module via RSU for ofﬂine training.
To better characterize the road conditions, we deﬁne the
following concepts:

159

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Deﬁnition 2.1 (Road Network G): We use a simple,
weighted graph G = (V, E) to describe the logical structure
of the roads and crossing. We set each road as an edge, where
E is the set of roads, E = {e1 , e2 , · · · , eM }. M is the number
of the edges. We assume all roads are dual carriageways. V
is the set of nodes, which represents intersections or vehicle
distribution centers, V = {v1 , v2 , · · · , vN }. The length of ej
is denoted as Lej . We regard the trafﬁc condition on the road
network as the attribute features of the node in the network,
expressed as S ∈ RM ×2×F , where F represents the number of
road attribute features. In this research, we deﬁne the vehicle
length as a ﬁxed value l. The number of vehicles in the
network is denoted as U . And the speed limit on road ej is
ej
denoted as smax
.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Safe Trafﬁc Capacity Cmax ): For the autonomous driving scenario, safe driving is the most important
and basic assistant service. Speciﬁcally, when danger happens,
the front vehicle brakes sharply and sends alert data frame
to the rear vehicle, the rear vehicle can promptly parse the
alert data frame and make a braking response. The safe trafﬁc
ej
capacity Cmax
can be deﬁned as maximum road capacity
to satisfy the IoV safe services with limited communication
resources on road ej , while C ej represents the number of
vehicles on road ej .
We assume the arrival rate of vehicles follows a Poisson
distribution with λ. The safety distance between the front and
rear car is denoted as d, the vehicle’s initial velocity is denoted
as v, the braking acceleration of the front car is ψf , the braking
acceleration of the rear car is ψr , where ψf is greater than ψr ,
the time from the front car sending the warning time to the
rear car receiving and resolving successfully is denoted as η.
The size of alert message is P Bits, and the maximum
bandwidth that can be allocated to agent is denoted as β ej
on road ej . In this research, we treat bandwidth as IoV
communication resource.
 Thee total bandwidth on the road ej
is denoted as B ej , i∈αej βi j ≤ B ej , where αej represents
vehicles set on e. The minimum value of the safety distance
between the two cars can be obtained from the kinematic
model as follows:
d

ej

ψf − ψr 2 ψf 2 ψf
η +
=
v +
ηv
2ψr2
2
ψr

(1)

P
+δ
β ej

(2)

η=

where δ is the ﬁxed alert message processing time for rear
vehicle. The maximum security density on the road ej can be
expressed as:
ej
Cmax
=

L ej
l + d ej

(3)

Constraint by the limited communication resource, the alloe
cated bandwidth βi j for vehicle i on road ej is reduced when
the number of vehicles exceeds the safe trafﬁc capacity, which

Figure 2. MADDPG with Trafﬁc Self-evolution

means vehicle i should decelerate to satisfy the demand for
safe driving. The vi on road ej can be expressed as:
⎧
ej
ej
⎪
C ej ≤ Cmax
⎪
⎨smax
e
(4)
vi j = 
⎪
⎪
ej
⎩ 2ψr ( Leejj − l) − 2ψr C eejjP C ej > Cmax
C

e
vi j

B

1 ej
3 smax ,

the driving status of vehicle i is deﬁned
≤
when
as congestion.
In this research, we assume that the passing time T vn
e
through intersection vn is static. The passing time Ti j on road
ej for vehicle i can be expressed as:
e

Ti j =

L ej
e
vi j

(5)

B. Optimizing The Transportation Efﬁciency
To improve the transportation efﬁciency of road network
with personal travel constraints, the optimization problem is
formulated as:
min
Π

s.t.

v∈V,e∈E


Tiv + Tie

i=1,2,··· ,U

⎧

q
⎨ C1 : πi Tiv + Tie ≤ Ti
⎩

C2 :


i∈Sv

(6)

c i ≤ Cv

where C1 represents the constraint of travel time for vehicle
i; C2 represents the consumption of communication resources
should not exceed its remaining resources. As this nonlinear
programming problem is NP-hard, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is adopted to solve this optimization problem.
III. MADDPG BASED W ITH S ELF -E VOLUTION
As a innovative RL method based on DDPG, MADDPG
can handle the problem of environment non-stationarity due
to the agents’ changing schemes very well. However in the
route planning scenario, the driving route actions of vehicle
have temporary short-term effects and long-term effects, which
is difﬁcult to assess accurately in MADDPG. In this section,
we propose MADDPG with trafﬁc self-evolution(MTSE) to
derive the long-term effects of current planning.

160

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

self-evolution as middleware. ITS central sever maintains a
target scheme μ̂ for each vehicle. When ITS central server in
road network collects vehicles’ action in an iteration, the selfevolution module iterates the scenario by using the μ̂ of all
vehicles with the current road network condition as input. The
proposed MTSE algorithm which is run on ITS is described
in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: MADDPG with trafﬁc self-evolution
algorithm
Figure 3. Workﬂow of self-Evolution module

1
2

The computation process are listed as follows:
1) Trafﬁc condition data acquisition and conversion:
RSU on each roadway collects the current O-D (OriginDestination) information and driving status reported by
vehicles in discrete ﬁxed interval time slots. Then RSU
reports the trafﬁc condition and vehicle status to the ITS
central server.
2) Route planing scheme:After each vehicle receives the
road network condition data, the scheme module of
each vehicle makes route planning decision based on
the trafﬁc condition and QoS constraint(e.g. travel time
requirement).
3) Check and feedback:The RSU check and collects the
vehicles’ scheme module combined with the current
road conditions to the ITS central server. The evolution module in central server evolves subsequent road
network scenarios using vehicles’ current scheme and
road condition. ITS calculates reward for each vehicle
according the evolution results and distributes feedback
via RSU.
To remove the assumption of knowing other agents’
schemes, each agent i can additionally maintain an approximation μ̂j
i to the true scheme μj of agent j in origin
MADDPG method, which can be learned by maximizing the
log probability of agent j’s actions. The target value ŷi in an
iteration can be expressed as:

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13
14
15
16
17

18
19
20
21

22
23

Initialize replay memory D to capacity O;
for vehicle i = 1 to N do
Initialize critic network Qi and actor μi with θi ;
Initialize the origin location oi and destination di ;
end
for episode = 1 to M do
Receive initial road network G’s trafﬁc condition x;
for t = 1 to max-episode-length do
for vehicle i = 1 to N do
select action ai = μθi (oi ) + Nt w. r. t. the
current scheme and exploration;
end
Execute actions a = (a1 , · · · , aN ) and new

state x ;
Self-evolution module calculate the target-Q
value yi ;
Store (xi , ai , yi , xi ) in replay buffer D;

x←x;
for vehicle i = 1 to N do
Sample a random minibatch of S samples

(xj , aj , yj , xj ) from D;
Update critic by minimizing the loss L(θi );
Update actor using the sampled scheme
gradient: (1);
end
Update target network parameters for each


vehicle i: θi = τ θi + (1 − τ )θi ;
end
end



i
N
ŷi = ri + γQμi (x , μ̂1
i (o1 ), · · · , μ̂i (oi ), · · · , μ̂i (oN )) (7)



N
In (7), γQμi (x , μ̂1
i (o1 ), · · · , μ̂i (oi ), · · · , μ̂i (oN )) represents the critic network that evaluates the future impact of
agent’s action under the current scheme from a central perspective. However, since the μ̂j
i is not the real scheme of agent
j, the reward inﬂuenced by other vehicles can’t be consistently
and accurately evaluated. On the other hand, as for route
planing scenario, the agent’s horizon is reduced exponentially
when γ ∈ (0, 1], which reduces long-term impact on strategy
evaluation.
To solve the problems above, we proposed MTSE that
evolves the condition of the entire road network in remaining
simulation time through current scheme and trafﬁc condition,
which enhanced feedback on strategy throughout route planing. Fig. 2 illustrates the framework of MTSE, which contains

1)State:X = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xN } is denoted as state space
reﬂecting the situation of environment, where xi is the
state subspace of vehicle, which includes trafﬁc condition
Ti = {T el , T e1 , T e2 , T e3 , T e4 } from located road and adjacent
roads, current time t and QoS requirement Tiq .
2)Action:vehicle’s action space is divided according to the
following rule: the actor network’s output probability is evenly
mapped into four actions: {f orward, back, right, lef t} respectively.
3)Reward:Fig. 3 illustrates the working mechanism of the
module. Once the iteration is complete, module will calculate
the target-Q value for vehicle i by sampling the vehicle i’s
route. In order to achieve better performance on the objective
optimization, the target-Q value of the agent i can be deﬁned

161

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Parameters
Number of roads
Bandwith of road
Road length
QoS of vehicle
Vehicle length
Speed Limit on road
Poisson factor
CPU frequency of vehicle
Max evolution step count
Scheme execution interval

Values
17
C ∈ (300bits/s, 1000bits/s)
L ∈ (50m, 200m)
t ∈ (600s, 3600s)
l=5
smax ∈ (8m/s, 22m/s)
λ=2
fi ∈ [2GHz, 3GHz]
K = 180
tδ = 10s

as follows:
ŷi = Riq + Rip
Riq

represents the QoS
where
can be expressed as:
⎧ Q
e
⎪
⎨Ti − Ti
q
e
Ri = ωq (Ti − TiQ )
⎪
⎩
−Pi

(8)

Figure 4. Travel demand satisfaction ratio with different road occupancy rate

reward for travel time, which
if C1 is violated
if C1 is not violated
otherwise

(9)

where ωq is penalty factor; Tie represents time of agent i
taken to reach the destination in self-evolution iteration; TiQ
represents travel time demand of agent i; P is a penalty which
is larger than ωq TiQ when vehicle i’s scheme route cannot be
iterated to the end.
Rip represents the reward in evolving routing, which reﬂects
the impact on congestion on the route and can be expressed
as:
Tcongestion
Rip = ωc
(10)
Te
where ωc represents the penalty factor for trafﬁc congestion.
Tcongestion represents the congestion time in the process of
self-evolution.

Fig. 4 illustrates the travel demand satisfaction ratio using
different schemes with different road occupancy rate. It can
be found that our algorithm signiﬁcantly satisﬁes the travel
demands of most vehicle under heavy trafﬁc load. Moreover,
with the road network occupancy rate, which means trafﬁc
load increases, our algorithm satisﬁes more vehicle. When
the road network load less than 100%, our algorithm is not
much different from DDPG scheme. This is because too few
vehicles to cause congestion on the road and vehicles are
normal driving. In the Dijkstra scheme, due to a lack of strategic communication, vehicles traveling on seemingly optimal
routes can trigger a series of congestion effects once they move
to the same road, while our algorithm fully considers increased
travel time due to congestion and personal travel demand, and
enhanced the ability to predict the subsequent evolution of the
road network.

IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the MTSE
algorithm in terms of travel demand satisfaction and congestion ratio, where the simulation results are obtained by using
tensorﬂow based on OpenAI-MADDPG code. The detailed
conﬁguration parameters are summarized in Table I.
To verify the efﬁciency of our proposed scheme, we apply
travel demand satisfaction ratio and travel timeout to indicate
the quality of individual travel for single vehicle. Besides,
we apply congestion time ratio to indicate the efﬁciency of
road network. To evaluate the efﬁciency of the proposed
MTSE algorithm, the following benchmark schemes are also
compared through simulation experiments:
1) DDPG Scheme: There is no evolution module in ITS,
vehicles share the actions and status of other vehicles for
training.
2) Dijkstra Scheme: The vehicles choose action by selecting
the path with the current shortest travel time with the goal of
reaching the destination.

Figure 5. Average timeout without reaching demand vehicles with different
road occupancy rate

Fig. 5 illustrates the average timeout without reaching
demand vehicles using different schemes with different road
occupancy rate. Generally, our algorithm has less timeout in

162

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[3]

[4]

[5]

Figure 6. Average congestion time ratio with different road occupancy rate

different trafﬁc load than the other schemes. This is because
our algorithm uses delay as part of the reward function for
scheme training feedback.
In Fig. 6, we compare average congestion time ratio with
different used by different schemes. It can be found our
algorithm can signiﬁcantly reduce congestion time when trafﬁc
load is heavy. When the road occupancy rate less than 90%,
our algorithm is not much different from other schemes.
This is because too few vehicles to cause congestion on the
road. However, once road occupancy rate increases to more
than 120%, the performance of our algorithm will reduce
congestion levels signiﬁcantly.

[6]

[7]

[8]

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated a joint route planning strategy
optimization method by considering the constraints of communication resources in the driving process along with the
auxiliary services of IoV in trafﬁc management. We proposed
a trafﬁc ﬂow condition model to analyze congestion under safe
driving conditions based on P-R time. Besides, to solve congestion caused by duplication of navigation strategies and improve the transportation efﬁciency in joint planning scenario,
a MADDPG with self-evolution algorithm was proposed.
Compared with the other schemes, our proposed algorithm
achieved the best performance with the highest personal travel
demand satisfaction ratio and the minimum timeout under high
road occupancy rate. In numerical analysis, our algorithm can
reduce the congestion time compared to the DDPG scheme
and the Dijkstra scheme under high road occupancy rate.

[10]

R EFERENCES

[12]

[9]

[11]

[1] X. Duan, J. Xu, Y. Chen, and R. Jiang, “Analysis
of inﬂuencing factors on urban trafﬁc congestion and
prediction of congestion time based on spatiotemporal
big data,” in 2020 International Conference on Big Data,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Internet of Things Engineering
(ICBAIE), pp. 75–78, 2020.
[2] G. Luo, Q. Yuan, H. Zhou, N. Cheng, Z. Liu, F. Yang, and
X. S. Shen, “Cooperative vehicular content distribution

163

in edge computing assisted 5g-vanet,” China Communications, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 1–17, 2018.
M. Lu, K. Zhang, J. Wu, and D. Tan, “Deep learning
based urban post-accidental congestion prediction,” in
2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on Mobile Ad
Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), (Los Alamitos, CA,
USA), pp. 155–156, IEEE Computer Society, oct 2018.
T. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhu, Y. Huang, and P. Zheng,
“Congestion pattern prediction for a busy trafﬁc zone
based on the hidden markov model,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 2390–2400, 2021.
D. Rachmawati, P. Sihombing, and B. Halim, “Implementation of best ﬁrst search algorithm in determining
best route based on trafﬁc jam level in medan city,” in
2020 International Conference on Data Science, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Business Analytics (DATABIA),
pp. 5–12, 2020.
D. Shan, W. Zhou, and J. Wang, “A novel personalized dynamic route recommendation approach based
on pearson similarity coefﬁcient in cooperative vehicleinfrastructure systems,” in 2018 IEEE 8th Annual International Conference on CYBER Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems (CYBER),
pp. 1270–1275, 2018.
T. Jia and D.-H. Long, “Optimization of evacuation route
for urban trafﬁc congestion based on particle swarm
optimization,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Industrial Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI),
pp. 351–356, 2020.
N. Sumon and A. Jaekel, “Fuel efﬁcient route planning
using vanet,” in 2018 IEEE 9th Annual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication Conference (IEMCON), pp. 468–474, 2018.
B. Chen, Q. Yuan, J. Li, J. Lu, and B. Zhu, “Joint route
planning and trafﬁc signal timing for connected vehicles: An edge cloud enabled multi-agent game method,”
in 2020 International Conference on Space-Air-Ground
Computing (SAGC), pp. 1–6, 2020.
J. nie, Z. He, H. Yuan, Z. Li, L. Gao, E. Zhang, Y. Yao,
and X. Zhang, “Automatic route guidance method based
on vanets,” in 2019 6th International Conference on
Information Science and Control Engineering (ICISCE),
pp. 1009–1012, 2019.
J. Xu, Y. Zhang, and C. Xing, “An effective selection
method for vehicle alternative route under trafﬁc congestion,” in 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on
Communication Technology (ICCT), pp. 494–499, 2018.
J. Li, D. Fu, Q. Yuan, H. Zhang, K. Chen, S. Yang,
and F. Yang, “A trafﬁc prediction enabled double rewarded value iteration network for route planning,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 5,
pp. 4170–4181, 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

