2024 IEEE International Conferences on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing & Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical & Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData) and IEEE Congress on Cybermatics | 979-8-3503-5163-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/iThings-GreenCom-CPSCom-SmartData-Cybermatics62450.2024.00058

2024 IEEE International Conferences on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing & Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical & Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData) and IEEE Congress

A Dynamic Risk-aware Routing Recommendation
Using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Difeng Zhu† , Hang Zhou‡ , Anchen Lin† , Binbin Zhou†,∗
†

School of Computer and Computing Science, Hangzhou City University, Hangzhou, China
‡
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
1062505054@qq.com, hangz@zju.edu.cn, 2230101009@stu.hzcu.edu.cn, bbzhou@hzcu.edu.cn

Abstract—Crime risks in urban environments vary over time
and space, making it challenging to find a safe and efficient
route. Previous solutions to this problem were too simplistic and
static, relying on exhaustive searches that were not practical. In
this paper, we present a new approach using deep reinforcement
learning for dynamic risk-aware path planning. Our method
evaluates crime risks and distances to suggest optimal routes
that adapt to changing conditions. We have designed a reward
system that considers road length, risk levels, and the decay of
risks over time. This innovative approach allows our model to
make decisions that balance distance and crime risk. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model compared to traditional path-planning methods, especially
as the road network grows in size.
Index Terms—Routing recommendation, Urban risk, Multiobjective path planning

I. I NTRODUCTION
Path planning problem is to identify a secure and convenient
route within a complex and dynamically evolving environment, which is a long-standing problem that has been the focus
of research for centuries, and it has a wide range of applications. It plays an important role in vehicle navigation, robot
path-finding, drone flight control, logistics transportation, and
many other fields.
Traditional path planning methods, such as Dijkstra and A*,
have often been used to obtain good results in static maps
relying on greedy enumeration methods [1]. They can quickly
compute the optimal route to reach the destination using the
computational power of computers. However, these algorithms
simplify the problem setting by frequently assuming that
the information on the map is constant, which is clearly
not true. The simplistic approach may make it difficult to
effectively express some changes in the real world, resulting in
certain errors. At the same time, using static map algorithms
requires collecting accurate map information prior to each
computation, which incurs significant costs in map collection
and processing.
To address the limitations of traditional algorithms in dynamic and large-scale maps, in recent years, various approaches have been explored, such as graph-based algorithms, heuristic search algorithms, evolutionary algorithms,
ant colony algorithms, deep learning algorithms, etc. Machine
learning algorithms such as deep reinforcement learning have
also been gradually applied to path planning problems. Deep

reinforcement learning can better capture the specific nature
of traffic conditions changes. It dynamically learns more
optimized and timely paths by interacting with agents in the
map. Additionally, the application of neural networks [2] helps
save computational costs associated with large-scale maps.
Some existing reinforcement learning methods may not have
adopted deep learning to cope with large-scale problems, or
may not have adopted multi-agent frameworks, resulting in
low processing efficiency in some cases. In addition, when
deep reinforcement learning is employed to address specific
problems, beyond setting up the appropriate reinforcement
learning framework, including defining agents, environments,
and actions, the development of an effective reward mechanism is crucial [3]. The reward mechanism allows the agent to
receive rewards when taking expected actions and punishments
when taking other actions, so that the agent understands what
it should and should not do during the learning process. A
suitable reward mechanism can help the agent better achieve
its goals.
To address this challenge, we introduce a unique reward
mechanism considering the length of the road segment, associated risk values, and the temporal decay of risks. Then, we
propose a dual objective dynamic perception path planning
method based on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,
where users can obtain safe and convenient routes in complex
and dynamic road networks by providing only the starting
point and destination.
The primary contributions of this study are as follows:
•

•

•

* Binbin Zhou is the corresponding author.

We design a novel reward mechanism: Three reward evaluation mechanisms are established to compute rewards
and penalties for the agent’s actions. These mechanisms
encompass path distance loss and risk loss, rewards
and penalties for alterations in the relative distance to
the destination before and after actions, and additional
rewards upon reaching the destination.
We introduce dynamic elements to the map: Risk values
fluctuate depending on the interaction between the agent
and the map, simulating daily changes in risk values
according to established rules.
The devised IMADQN algorithm exhibits superior performance compared to the baseline, particularly on largescale maps, yielding more favorable results than on smallscale maps.

2836-3701/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
235
DOI 10.1109/iThings-GreenCom-CPSCom-SmartData-Cybermatics62450.2024.00058
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section II provides a review of related work. Section III
outlines the problem statement, and Section IV introduces the
IMADQN algorithm. Section V details the experimental setup
and results. Finally, section VI concludes with a summary of
our work.

networks for model training. This method using multi-agent
reinforcement learning is not only better than traditional
algorithms, but also has less computation time. It can be seen
that for real-world problems with multiple objects, multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning is also a good choice. Multiagent deep reinforcement learning is generally divided into
homogeneous agents and heterogeneous agents based on the
relationship between agents. In homogeneous agents, each
agent can be regarded as the same, while in heterogeneous
agents, each agent may not be the same. Because too many
agents may lead to redundant learning and large computational
time and space costs, it is necessary to grasp the appropriate
number.

II. R ELATED W ORK
In recent years, a research trend for path-planning problems
has been to use machine learning methods, such as reinforcement learning, to provide optimal paths. Many traditional VRP
problems related to our work have achieved certain results
through these machine learning methods [4]. In addition, with
the advent of the information age and the application of 5G
networks, many path planning problems have also begun to
gradually focus on the study of dynamic problems. In [5], the
author proposed a two-stage hybrid algorithm to solve DVRP,
which allows vehicles to dynamically process information and
choose appropriate routes during real-time travel.
In the past decades, there have been some efforts to model
path planning problems with reinforcement learning. Reinforcement [6] learning enables agents to learn how to make
decisions through trial and error. In reinforcement learning,
the agent needs to explore the environment and interact with
it, constantly adjusting its strategy according to feedback
from the environment, in order to obtain better results. An
excellent strategy is very important for reinforcement learning
throughout [7], which strongly affects the performance of the
final agent. However, ordinary reinforcement learning requires
a Q table [8] to record state rewards and actions. However,
this method can be used quickly for small problems. Once it
encounters large problems, the huge volume of the problem
will bring a huge space and time consumption, which is not
suitable for use in large maps.
Deep learning has a wide range of applications, including
High-precision modeling [9] [10], network association mining
[11], real-time and efficient model processing [12], control
management systems [13] [14], and even data privacy and
security [15] [16] [17]. Deep reinforcement learning networks
combine reinforcement learning and deep learning, using deep
learning networks to replace Q tables for recording. In this
way, only the parameters on the neural network need to be
recorded, saving space and time. [18]proposed an autonomous
path planning model based on DRL, which performs intelligent path planning for unmanned ships in unknown environments. These works have demonstrated the feasibility and
effectiveness of deep reinforcement learning in path-planning
problems. However, the learning capacity of a single agent is
limited. If deep reinforcement learning has only one agent, it
may not cover various actions and may lead to a long learning
time in a changing environment.
Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning uses multiple
agents for deep reinforcement learning. In [19], the author
proposed a novel reinforcement learning algorithm called the
multi-agent attention model and also developed a multi-agent
reinforcement learning method with unsupervised auxiliary

III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
This article addresses real-time navigation in a dynamically
changing road environment, with risk perception updating in
real-time based on current road traffic. Specifically, as road
traffic intensifies, the risk value decreases and vice versa.
Our objective is to offer optimal path recommendations in a
dynamically changing road network, promoting low-risk and
short-distance travel. We advocate the use of deep reinforcement learning to learn dynamic road information from the
map through continuous agent-map interaction, enabling the
acquisition of low-risk and short-distance routes.
Input: Given a set of source and destination points, the road
network G = (V, E) is provided, where V is the set of all
nodes on the graph, i.e., road intersections, and E is the set
of edges; any e in E represents multi-attribute edges, with
attributes including distance and crime risk.
Output: A set of routes from the source node to the
destination node.


d1 1
 d2 1

D= .
 ..

d1 2
d2 2
..
.

...
...
..
.

dm 1 dm 2 . . .



d1 N
d2 N 

.. 
. 
dm n


. . . r1 N
. . . r2 N 

.. 
..
.
. 
rm 1 rm 2 . . . rm n

r1 1
 r2 1

R= .
 ..

(1)

r1 2
r2 2
..
.

(2)

We now provide further explanation of the road grid information. In this paper, we use a quad-grid world to represent
the map. We employ two n × n two-dimensional matrices to
represent the road environment with n nodes. One matrix is
used to represent distance and is called the D matrix, while
the other matrix represents crime risk and is referred to as the
R matrix. For specific points in the matrices, such as d[i][j]
or r[i][j], they respectively denote the distance or crime risk
parameter from node i to node j. In particular, if the value
of d[i][j] is 0, this means that there is no direct connection
between node i and node j. It should be noted that the risk
matrix varies based on the volume of traffic along that edge

236
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

over time t. We use a decay function to depict this variation
and achieve a realistic effect.
Simultaneously, this paper introduces a temporal dimension
that mirrors the real world, where each day corresponds to a
round, and the day’s duration is partitioned into T = 144 time
intervals (each interval representing 10 minutes). The agent
within the mapped environment is required to make action
decisions at each time interval. With the beginning of each day,
i.e., each round, the map environment undergoes initialization
to simulate the onset of a new day. This process aims to
distinguish the varying conditions on the road at different times
of the day.
To solve this problem, we propose using multi-agent reinforcement learning to formalize the problem. Formally, this
article models the problem as a Markov game [20]G with N
agents, defined by the tuple G = (N, S, a, R, γ), where N,
S, a, P, R, γ are the number of agents, the set of states, the
set of actions, the reward function and the discount factor,
respectively. The definitions are as follows.
Agent: In this paper, agents can be pedestrians, drivers, cyclists, etc. Depending on the mode of transportation and their
roles, they can also be divided into students, office workers,
etc. We consider agents with the same state as homogeneous
agents. Specifically, agents of the same type on the same
grid at the same time can be considered homogeneous, which
means that they have the same strategy. In experiments, the
generation time, quantity, and location of agents on the map
have certain regularities [21], which enhances the simulation
of specific areas and populations. Generally, people always
leave home, which is the same point, and the number of
drivers in different areas of the city varies. For example,
residential areas usually have more residents than commercial
areas and the number of drivers is roughly the same. Due to
the constraints of work hours, daily travel times are usually
the same. The total number of agents will change over time.
State: sgt ϵS , they represent the situation of agents in the
environment. tϵT is the time index and is the region index
where the driver is located. The state of an agent can be defined
by the point on the grid at a certain moment. Agents on the
same grid at the same time have the same state.
Action: agt ϵA , they are the actions taken by agents in
the environment. tϵT is the time index and g is the region
index where the driver is located. We set four possible values
representing the four directions (up, down, left, right) on the
grid. For example, agt = 0 equals a move upward.
agt = {up, down, lef t, right} = {0, 1, 2, 3}

Fig. 1. An Overview of our IMADQN Model

penalize the agent when it passes through high-risk longdistance road sections, thereby reducing the probability of
choosing these road sections and selecting low-risk shortdistance road sections instead; ri2 represents the reward based
on the change in relative distance between the current position
and the destination before and after the action, encouraging the
agent to move closer to the destination and penalizing moving
away from it, thereby helping the agent to have a general idea
of which direction to go after each action, improving learning
efficiency instead of wandering aimlessly; ri3 , which represents
the additional reward for reaching the destination, allowing
agents who successfully reach the destination to receive a
reward that is propagated to the previous actions through
the discount factor γ,thus increasing the probability of those
actions being taken correctly and increasing the probability of
navigating to the destination correctly. Agents that make the
same action (from the same position to another of the same
position) have the same reward function. It should also be
noted that, at any given moment, if multiple agents take the
same action from one point to another, the reward generated by
this behavior will be averaged. This means that this experience
will only be recorded once to prevent agents from congregating
and giving too much reward to a certain action.
Discount factor: γ, this parameter represents the foresight
of the agent for the future, with a value ranging from 0 to 1.
A higher value indicates a clearer view of future rewards for
the agent.
State transition probability: it gives the probability of
transitioning to the next state when taking an action in the
current state. Please note that the actions are deterministic.
When there are multiple identical transition probability values,
one will be randomly selected.

(3)

Furthermore, the agent’s action is also influenced by its
location, as agents located in the corners will have fewer
available action directions. The time index t increases by 1
after each action.
Reward: Ri ϵR, rewards are obtained by the agents after
completing an action in each time interval. Ri is the reward
obtained by a single agent after taking a single action, and
each Ri consists of three parts: ri1 ,ri2 ,ri3 , which ri1 represents the distance cost and risk cost on the action, ri1 can

IV. A LGORITHM I NTRODUCTION
In this section, we introduce a new multi-agent RL
method called the Integrated Multi-Agent Deep Q-Network
(IMADQN) algorithm. We first provide a brief overview of
the basic DQN method in Section A, and then outline the
specific steps of our IMADQN algorithm in Section B.

237
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

instead of using a single network as in DQN. This approach
avoids conflicts or interference between Q-value functions.
Specifically, IMADQN first establishes two separate neural
networks (Q-real and Q-estimated) for each agent, with the
input being the state corresponding to the agent and the output
being the Q-value of the agent’s action. At each time step, each
agent executes the action with the highest Q-value in the environment according to the neural network, from one network to
another, and observes new states and reward signals fed back
to the neural network to update the network, while storing
this information in its experience replay buffer. An experience
consists of an agent taking action1 from a certain state to reach
another state and obtaining a reward. The Q-estimated neural
network is updated at each time step according to the agent’s
behavior based on the loss function, while the Q-real neural
network synchronizes parameters with the Q-estimated neural
network after a few rounds. In addition, all agents share the
same experience replay buffer, and then every once in a while,
a certain number of experience tuples are randomly sampled
from it, so that the agent can learn from others’ experiences
to speed up the training of a comprehensive neural network
adapted to the entire road grid.
It is important to note that all agents share the same experience replay, allowing agents to learn from the experiences
of other agents and update their individual neural networks
accordingly.
The reward formula is as follows:

A. Overview of the DQN Method
The main idea behind DQN (Deep Q-Network) is to use
a deep neural network to estimate the Q-value function and
improve the policy. The key component of the DQN algorithm
is the construction and training of the deep neural network.
In DQN, the state is used as input, and the Q-values for
each possible action are outputted. During the training process,
DQN utilizes experience replay [22], which involves randomly
sampling from historical experiences to train and improve
stability.
According to the Q-learning algorithm, updating the Qtable requires both the Q-target and Q-estimate, which are
themselves generated by the Q-table.
Q(S, a) ← Q(S, a) + α[R + γ ∗ maxQ(S ′ , a′ ) − Q(S, a)] (4)
Where a is action, R is the reward obtained after a round
of actions, γ is the discount factor.Q-target is Q (S, a), and
Q-estimate is [R + γ * maxQ(S’, a’)].
This formula can be further derived as:
Q(S, a) ← (1−α)∗Q(S, a)+α∗[R +γ ∗maxQ(S ′ , a′ )] (5)
It’s important to note that the Q-estimate neural network has
the latest parameters and is updated after each agent’s action in
each round of the grid. On the other hand, the Q-target neural
network uses previous parameters and is only updated after
multiple rounds of agent actions, remaining the same as the
Q-estimate. The networks are updated using a loss function:
Loss = (R + γ(max(Q(S ′ , a′ ))) − Q(S, a))2

Ri = α ∗ ri1 + β ∗ ri2 + ri3

(7)

Reward based on discount factor γ The formula passed to
the previous action can be expressed as:

(6)

In simple terms, it resembles ordinary least squares [23]
and minimizes the squared difference between the actual and
predicted values.
Overall, DQN leverages a deep neural network to approximate the Q-value function, allowing for more complex
strategies to be learned. By utilizing experience replay and
updating the neural network based on the Q-target and Qestimate.
It should be noted that the initial neural network parameters
are randomized.

Ri (sgt11 , agt11 )′ = Ri (sgt11 , agt11 ) + γ ∗ Ri (sgt22 , agt22 )

(8)

This formula can be further derived as:
Ri (sgt11 , agt11 )′ = Ri (sgt11 , agt11 )+γ∗(Ri (sgt22 , agt22 )+γ∗Ri (sgt33 , agt33 ))
(9)
Overall, the IMADQN algorithm uses a separate learning method, effectively avoiding interference between agents
and better coordinating behavior between multiple agents to
achieve excellent performance in multi-agent environments.

B. IMADQN
V. E XPERIMENTS

The IMADQN algorithm used in this paper combines independent Q-learning with DQN, as shown in Fig. 1. Traditional
DQN typically involves a single agent, which can result in
lower learning efficiency. Therefore, IMADQN is employed,
which consists of multiple agents differentiated by their IDs
(i). Multiple agents enable rapid exploration of the map and
achieve efficient learning.
IMADQN extends upon DQN. Compared to a single agent,
the interaction between multiple agents is more complex,
requiring a more efficient and accurate learning approach. The
core idea of IMADQN is to use multiple independent neural
networks to estimate the Q-value function for each agent,

A. Experimental settings
We conducted experiments on virtual quad-grid maps of
sizes 10x10 and 20x20, which correspond to 100 and 400
nodes respectively. Each pair of connected nodes on the map
has two attributes: distance and crime risk. At the beginning of
each experiment, agents are generated on the map in a regular
pattern. As time T progresses, in each round, agents choose
to move one grid cell up, down, left, or right until they reach
their destination. It is important to note that the movement of
agents in each round alters the crime risk values. Specific map
settings are based on three considerations:

238
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1. Different map sizes: Just as when traveling from Beijing
to Hangzhou, different starting points and destinations within a
city require maps of different sizes. Therefore, since different
individuals may have different starting points and destinations,
there is a demand for maps of various sizes. This paper
conducts experiments on multiple maps of different sizes.
2. Risk sparsity coefficient: Considering that road risk levels
vary in different regions in reality, some roads may have
lower risk values due to better safety conditions, even close
to zero risk, while other areas may have higher road risks
due to relatively weak regulations. To test the applicability in
various environments, this paper designs maps with different
risk sparsity coefficients, where some edges of the map do not
have risk. Specifically, on a map with a sparsity coefficient of
60%, approximately 60% of the road edge attributes have a
risk value of 0. A higher sparsity coefficient indicates a denser
distribution of risk values on roads.
3. Risk value variation coefficient: Additionally, considering
that road conditions can be complex and changeable, the risk
values of some roads may vary significantly due to time
restrictions and monitoring, while other roads may remain
relatively stable and unchanged due to the sparse traffic. This
paper simulates different degrees of road variation by setting
a variation coefficient of the risk value. A higher coefficient
indicates faster changes in road risk attribute values.

250

 % D V H O L Q H  5 L V N  & R V W
 5 /  5 L V N  & R V W

200
150
100
50
0

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

90%

100%

(a) in 10*10 map

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

 % D V H O L Q H  5 L V N  & R V W
 5 /  5 L V N  & R V W

60%

70%

80%

(b) in 20*20 map
Fig. 2. Risk values of different methods under different risk value sparsity

sparsity. The results are summarized in Fig. 2 (a) and (b).
Although RL’s method obtained a higher risk value on a 60%,
sparse 10*10 map, which may be due to the existence of a
large number of risk-free roads that prevent the RL method
from demonstrating its advantages, in other groups, the RL
method achieved lower risk value scores. Overall, we can see
that the higher the risk sparsity of the map, and the denser the
map information, the better our RL method can learn highquality routes that are superior to the baseline, resulting in
relatively lower risk value scores.

B. Performance comparison
In this section, the performance of the following methods
was evaluated:
1. Dijkstra: This algorithm is based on a single source point
and calculates the shortest distance from each node to the
source point, gradually expanding the information coverage
until the entire graph is covered. It can find the shortest path
between any two nodes in the graph.
2. A*: The A* algorithm is a heuristic search algorithm
commonly used for path-finding problems. It can find the
shortest path between a start and an end point in a graph data
structure. This algorithm improves upon Dijkstra’s algorithm
by incorporating a heuristic function to select more optimized
paths, leading to improved efficiency.
3.IMADQN: As described in Section 4.2, this is an independent multi-agent deep reinforcement learning method that
learns policies through interactions between multiple agents
of different types and the environment.
The performance of the above three methods was mainly
compared in two aspects. First, the time taken to generate
the paths (time) was evaluated. Second, the distance and risk
values associated with the generated paths were compared.
The metric used for the evaluation was α × distance + β ×
crime.

D. Impact of the coefficient of change in risk value
Specifically, in this experiment, the variability of information is reflected in the magnitude of the changes in risk values.
In this section, we compared the distance and risk value scores
of the baseline and our RL method on maps with different
degrees of risk value change. The results are summarized in
Fig. 3 (a) and (b). Due to the ability of the RL method to learn
and update decisions in real-time based on the information in
the environment, it performs better in dynamically changing
environments. In general, the greater the degree of change
in risk value on the map, the more effectively reinforcement
learning can learn high-quality routes that are superior to the
baseline.
VI. C ONCLUSION

C. Influence of Sparse Coefficient of Risk Value

In this paper, we proposed a path recommendation system
based on deep reinforcement learning that learns efficient
routes through deep learning networks of multiple intelligent
agents in complex and volatile map information. Additionally,

Specifically, in this experiment, the information density is
reflected in the sparsity of higher risk values. In this section,
we compared the distance and risk scores of the baseline and
our RL method on maps with different levels of risk value

239
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[6] A. K. Shakya, G. Pillai, and S. Chakrabarty, “Reinforcement learning algorithms: A brief survey,” Expert Systems with Applications, p. 120495,
2023.
[7] M. Andrychowicz, A. Raichuk, P. Stańczyk, M. Orsini, S. Girgin,
R. Marinier, L. Hussenot, M. Geist, O. Pietquin, M. Michalski, et al.,
“What matters in on-policy reinforcement learning? a large-scale empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05990, 2020.
[8] B. Jang, M. Kim, G. Harerimana, and J. W. Kim, “Q-learning algorithms:
A comprehensive classification and applications,” IEEE access, vol. 7,
pp. 133653–133667, 2019.
[9] X. Zhou, Q. Yang, X. Zheng, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, J. Ma, Y. Pan,
and Q. Jin, “Personalized federated learning with model-contrastive
learning for multi-modal user modeling in human-centric metaverse,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 42, no. 4,
pp. 817–831, 2024.
[10] X. Zhou, X. Ye, K. I.-K. Wang, W. Liang, N. K. C. Nair, S. Shimizu,
Z. Yan, and Q. Jin, “Hierarchical federated learning with social context
clustering-based participant selection for internet of medical things
applications,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1742–1751, 2023.
[11] X. Zhou, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, and L. T. Yang, “Deep correlation
mining based on hierarchical hybrid networks for heterogeneous big
data recommendations,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social
Systems, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 171–178, 2021.
[12] X. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Cui, J. Shi, W. Liang, Z. Yan, L. T. Yang,
S. Shimizu, and K. I.-K. Wang, “Digital twin enhanced federated
reinforcement learning with lightweight knowledge distillation in mobile
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41,
no. 10, pp. 3191–3211, 2023.
[13] X. Zhou, X. Zheng, T. Shu, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, L. Qi, S. Shimizu,
and Q. Jin, “Information theoretic learning-enhanced dual-generative
adversarial networks with causal representation for robust ood generalization,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
pp. 1–14, 2023.
[14] X. Zhou, W. Liang, A. Kawai, K. Fueda, J. She, and K. I.-K. Wang,
“Adaptive segmentation enhanced asynchronous federated learning for
sustainable intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–9, 2024.
[15] X. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Liang, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Y. Pan, and K. I-Kai Wang,
“Federated distillation and blockchain empowered secure knowledge
sharing for internet of medical things,” Information Sciences, vol. 662,
p. 120217, 2024.
[16] X. Zhou, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, Z. Yan, L. T. Yang, W. Wei, J. Ma,
and Q. Jin, “Decentralized p2p federated learning for privacy-preserving
and resilient mobile robotic systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–89, 2023.
[17] X. Zhou, Q. Yang, Q. Liu, W. Liang, K. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Ma, and
Q. Jin, “Spatial–temporal federated transfer learning with multi-sensor
data fusion for cooperative positioning,” Information Fusion, vol. 105,
p. 102182, 2024.
[18] S. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and Y. Du, “An autonomous path planning
model for unmanned ships based on deep reinforcement learning,”
Sensors, vol. 20, no. 2, p. 426, 2020.
[19] K. Zhang, F. He, Z. Zhang, X. Lin, and M. Li, “Multi-vehicle routing
problems with soft time windows: A multi-agent reinforcement learning
approach,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
vol. 121, p. 102861, 2020.
[20] X. Xiang and S. Foo, “Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning
applications for solving partially observable markov decision processes
(pomdp) problems: Part 1—fundamentals and applications in games,
robotics and natural language processing,” Machine Learning and
Knowledge Extraction, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 554–581, 2021.
[21] A. Kazeem, L. Jensen, and C. S. Stokes, “School attendance in nigeria: Understanding the impact and intersection of gender, urban-rural
residence, and socioeconomic status,” Comparative education review,
vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 295–319, 2010.
[22] T. L. Hayes, G. P. Krishnan, M. Bazhenov, H. T. Siegelmann, T. J.
Sejnowski, and C. Kanan, “Replay in deep learning: Current approaches
and missing biological elements,” Neural computation, vol. 33, no. 11,
pp. 2908–2950, 2021.
[23] J. F. Hair Jr, M. Sarstedt, L. Hopkins, and V. G. Kuppelwieser, “Partial
least squares structural equation modeling (pls-sem) an emerging tool in
business research,” European business review, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 106–
121, 2014.

 % D V H O L Q H  5 L V N  & R V W
 5 /  5 L V N  & R V W
200

150

100

50

0
0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

(a) in 10*10 map
500

 % D V H O L Q H  5 L V N  & R V W
 5 /  5 L V N  & R V W

400

300

200

100

0
0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

(b) in 20*20 map
Fig. 3. Risk values of different methods under different degrees of risk value
changes

we demonstrate through specific datasets that the proposed
method achieves better results when faced with larger map
sizes and significant changes in map information.
Future work includes conducting experiments on larger
maps and real-world datasets, as well as designing more
suitable agents and rewards for different populations based
on this framework.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is partially supported by the Zhejiang Provincial
Natural Science Foundation (No. LTGG24F020002) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (62102349).
The authors would like to acknowledge the Supercomputing
Center of Hangzhou City University for the support of the
advanced computing resources.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Liu, E. K. Chong, A. Pezeshki, and Z. Zhang, “Submodular optimization problems and greedy strategies: A survey,” Discrete Event Dynamic
Systems, vol. 30, pp. 381–412, 2020.
[2] Z. Li, F. Liu, W. Yang, S. Peng, and J. Zhou, “A survey of convolutional
neural networks: analysis, applications, and prospects,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 2021.
[3] R. T. Icarte, T. Q. Klassen, R. Valenzano, and S. A. McIlraith, “Reward
machines: Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 73, pp. 173–208,
2022.
[4] T. Erdelić, T. Carić, et al., “A survey on the electric vehicle routing
problem: variants and solution approaches,” Journal of Advanced Transportation, vol. 2019, 2019.
[5] M. Abdirad, K. Krishnan, and D. Gupta, “A two-stage metaheuristic
algorithm for the dynamic vehicle routing problem in industry 4.0
approach,” Journal of Management Analytics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 69–83,
2021.

240
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

