2023 IEEE International Symposium on Product Compliance Engineering - Asia (ISPCE-ASIA) | 979-8-3503-6120-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISPCE-ASIA60405.2023.10365789

A Joint Design of Path Planning and Lane
Reservation for Emergency Service in ITS
Zhaoyang Li, Bingyi Liu, Enshu Wang, Jinfan Wang, Weizhen Han

Abstract—Reaching the accident scene promptly for emergency
vehicles (EVs) can significantly alleviate the negative impact
of accidents. However, finding a way to reduce the response
time of EVs (i.e., the travel time of an EV to reach the rescue
location) remains a challenge that needs to be addressed. In this
paper, we design a distributed intelligent transportation system
(DITS) powered by vehicular fog computing (VFC), which offers
new possibilities for designing traffic scheduling methods. We
propose a soft actor-critic-based EV rapid passage approach
(SACRP) to minimize the response time of EVs. The collaborative
lane reservation module uses the latest traffic data to create a
traffic dispatch strategy to reserve empty lane. Subsequently,
we propose a soft actor-critic-based algorithm as the real-time
path planning module. The path planning module integrates vital
road information, such as lane reservation priority, real-time
road data, EV location, and traffic signal information. The path
planning module strategically plans the path with the shortest
response time for the EV. We conduct extensive experiments to
evaluate the performance of the proposed method, and the results
show that the response time for EVs could be reduced by 24.6%
compared to the latest study.
Index Terms—Emergency vehicle, soft actor-critic algorithm,
lane reservation, path planning

I. INTRODUCTION
With the expanding scale of urbanization and rapid economic development, urban population and social production
activities are highly concentrated, which leads to an increased
probability of emergencies. Since the social hazards caused
by emergencies can increase significantly over time, accident
hazards are difficult to contain once the optimal time for
rescue is missed [1]. Therefore, shortening the response time
of emergency vehicles (EVs) is crucial to improve the quality
of emergency services and reduce the damage caused by
accidental disasters. As an illustrative example, a fire incident
can lead to significant economic losses if the fire trucks arrive
at the scene after the critical extinguishing time, typically 4
Zhaoyang Li is with the School of Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China. Emai: lizhaoyang lee@whut.edu.cn.
Bingyi Liu is with the School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China, Chongqing
Research Institute, Wuhan University of Technology, Chongqing, 401120,
China, and also with Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park of Wuhan
University of Technology, Sanya, 572025, China. E-mail: byliu@whut.edu.cn.
Enshu Wang is with the Department of Future Science and Engineering,
Soochow University, Suzhou, 214998, China. E-mai: eswang@suda.edu.cn.
Jinfan Wang is with the Institute of Future Networks, Southern University of
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China, and with LINKINSENSE
Co., Ltd, Hefei, China. E-mai: wangjf@sustech.edu.cn.
Weizhen Han is with the School of Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, China. E-mai:
hanweizhen@whut.edu.cn.

to 11 minutes after the fire outbreak [2]. In addition, as urban
populations grow, the number of car owners increases dramatically. This phenomenon reduces the ability of emergency
vehicles to travel to the location of an emergency incident,
especially during rush hour, and delays in EVs will result
in lower rescue success rates. Besides, in many countries,
EVs can exceed designated road speeds and cross intersections
without obeying traffic signals, and other vehicles must yield,
resulting in a significantly higher accident rate for EVs than
ordinary vehicles (OVs). Furthermore, it is of great practical
importance to design an effective dispatching method to help
EVs reach their destinations faster and more safely.
Unlike OVs, EVs may not be subject to specific traditional
road rules, such as going through an intersection at a stoplight
or speeding. However, numerous OVs may still impede EVs
on heavy-traffic roads. To solve this problem, one research line
focused on road-centric approaches [3–7] that aim to improve
the average speed of EVs by minimizing OV interference to
EVs through active traffic dispatch. These studies need to
address the inefficiency of OVs giving way to EV. It is mainly
due to the lack of real-time traffic data and support for lowdelay scheduling strategies. Furthermore, the dynamic traffic
situation and the effect of a scheduling strategy on OVs are
rarely considered in these approaches. Another research line
resorted to vehicle-centric approaches [8–11] to recommend
the optimal path for EVs using path optimization techniques
and time optimization techniques such as the Dijkstra algorithm [8], A* algorithm [9], and evolutionary strategies [10].
Active traffic scheduling strategies still need to be developed
for these approaches. They tend to perform better when there is
less traffic. However, when traffic demand increases, queues
form, and it becomes challenging for EVs to change lanes
or overtake due to the absence of active traffic dispatching
strategies.
The distributed intelligent transportation system (DITS) collects, processes, and shares urban traffic information through
vehicles or roadside units (RSUs). This enables the interconnection of vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure
(V2I), and vehicle-to-network (V2N) communication, ultimately leading to safer and more intelligent vehicle path
planning and dynamic traffic scheduling [12]. Nevertheless,
existing research [13–16] indicates that more than relying
solely on a single road-centric or vehicle-centric approach
is required to meet response requirements of EVs. These
factors motivate us to combine real-time path planning and
cooperative lane reservation modules to minimize the response
time of EVs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We propose a VFC-driven DITS that supports low-latency
traffic scheduling and multidimensional real-time traffic information query. With the support of the proposed DITS, we
propose a soft actor-critic-based EV rapid passage approach
(SACRP), which aims to reduce the response time of EVs
by controlling the traffic flow and allowing them to travel
from empty lanes to high speeds. SACRP includes a collaborative lane reservation module and a real-time path planning
module. The collaborative lane reservation module considers
lane assignment, lane capacity, vehicle speed, traffic network
conditions and traffic signal phase to design an empty lane
reservation scheme for the road. Subsequently, we model the
path planning problem of EVs in urban scenarios as a markov
decision process (MDP) [17]. With the support of the DITS
and a soft actor-critic-based (SAC-based) algorithm, we use
dynamic urban traffic information to plan the most efficient
path with the shortest response time for EVs.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We propose a VFC-driven DITS system that significantly
reduces data transmission delays, making it possible
to design active traffic scheduling strategies for lane
reservation.
2) Based on the DITS, our proposed SACRP approach can
effectively adapt to dynamic traffic flow and minimize
the EV’s response time in complex urban traffic scenarios.
3) We build a simulator to verify the performance of
SACRP in actual metropolitan settings. The results show
that, for the majority of indicators, the SACRP strategy
consistently outperforms all baseline methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the system model of the scheme. The details of
the SACRP approach are presented in Section III. Section
IV discusses the experimental performance of the SACRP
approach. Finally, conclusions and future perspectives are
presented in Section V.

Cellular BS

Traffic Control Center
(Cloud Layer)

RSU Area

RSU
Fig. 1. An example of the VFC-driven distributed intelligent transportation
system in an urban scenario.

•

•

•

Cloud Layer: The cloud layer can obtain dynamic city
road information and is mainly responsible for city-level
monitoring, decision-making, and centralized remote control.
Cloudlet Layer: It mainly consists of RSUs. RSU is
deployed at each intersection as the control node of the
vehicular-fog network.
Fog Layer: The fog layer includes all the vehicles and
equipment in the RSUs wireless communication range.
Due to the sophisticated capabilities of the onboard
equipment in sensing, computation, communication, and
storage, this layer is crucial for vehicular fog computing
(VFC).
III. DESIGN OF SACRP

This section describes the proposed approach for minimizing the response time of emergency vehicles (EVs) from the
point of departure to the destination.

II. SYSTEM MODEL
This section introduces the proposed distributed intelligent
transportation system, which supports low-latency traffic dispatch and multidimensional real-time traffic information query.
A. VFC-driven Distributed Intelligent Transportation System
We propose a vehicular fog computing-driven distributed
intelligent transportation system (DITS), as shown in Figure
1, which uses a cloud-fog-vehicle three-layer architecture. The
system comprises traffic control center (TCC), roadside units
(RSUs), vehicles, signals, other internet of vehicle infrastructure, and cellular network. DITS, Functionally Specialized
VFC, has been designed with a dedicated functional application to address the characteristics of the proposed emergency
vehicle fast-tracking scheme. For example, the lane reservation
module has high real-time requirements. However, the task
cannot be offloaded at will due to security requirements, so
a specialized VFC application is designed to implement the
requirements.

A. Framework
The soft actor-critic-based EV rapid passage approach
(SACRP) contains a cooperative lane reservation module and
a real-time path planning module that interact with each
other and iterate through the decisions. The cooperative lane
reservation module focuses on the traffic information of a
particular road. At each time interval t, the optimal lane
reservation scheme is decided based on the real-time road
information and the EV’s location. Then, the roadside units
(RSUs) near the road perform traffic scheduling and reserve
an empty lane for the EV by controlling signals and ordinary
vehicles (OVs). In the real-time path planning module, we
propose a soft actor-critic-based (SAC-based) algorithm based
on EV path planning in dynamic traffic scenarios using global
information on urban traffic and detailed traffic information
near EVs. Foremost, we use a markov decision process (MDP)
to simulate the EV path planning problem. In order to map the
link between state observation and behavior, a neural network

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

model is then created. The path with the multiple significant
long-term cumulative benefits is chosen at each time interval
t based on the traffic patterns near the EV, the current phases
of the traffic signals, and other factors.
B. Collaborative Lane Reservation Module
The cooperative lane reservation module can reserve empty
lanes for EVs in advance so that EVs can drive on the road
at maximum speed and minimize the response time of EVs.
The workflow of the cooperative lane reservation module is
shown in the Figure 2, specifically:
• Step 1: Firstly, the RSU on the road obtains real-time
road information through vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
communication.
• Step 2: Then, the module calculates the current road
carrying capacity C, where the current road carrying
capacity C is the number of vehicles traveling simultaneously for a standard vehicle length and a standard vehicle
distance.
l(vi ,vi+1 )
C(vi ,vi+1 ) = PV
·(k(vi ,vi+1 ) −1) (1)
(vi ,vi+1 )
lov
x=1
+ dgap
V(vi ,vi+1 )
•

•

•
•

Step 3: Based on C, determine whether it is necessary to
perform vehicle clear-out. If not, skip to Step 4. Instead,
design a specific plan for vehicle clear-out (i.e., Vehicles
exceeding road capacity need to be directed to other roads
and diverted in advance).
Step 4: Determine whether signal preemption needs to be
executed. Instead, design the signal preemption scheme
(e.g., the signal in the red light stage needs to be seized
for the green light). If not, skip to Step 5.
Step 5: Design a vehicle give way solution.
Step 6: Set the lane reservation priority for the current
road based on the above steps.

C. Real-Time Path Planning Module
Reaching the accident scene promptly for EVs can significantly alleviate the negative impact of accidents. We use the
TCC as an agent and convert the path planning problem for
EVs into an MDP to decrease EVs’ response times. The MDP
is defined as follows:
• State: State mainly consists of macroscopic global traffic
data and microscopic perspective EV-related information.
• Action: In the road network, the reinforcement learning
agent can go from one state to another by turning left,
right, around, or straight. Hence, the action space size is
4, including turning left, straight, right, and around.
• Reward: The agent aims to minimize EVs’ response time
on every road segment. The agent’s reward is determined
by the negative weighted sum of the EV’s travel time,
time spent preempting the signal, and parking time.
R = −(Tev + Tdelay + Ddis ),
where Ddis use Manhattan distance.

(2)

Traffic signal
preemption ?

Start

N

Y
Obtaining road traffic
data

Traffic signal
preemption solution

Calculate the road
carrying capacity

Ordinary vehicles give
way solution
N

Vehicle clear-out ?

Calculate lane
reservation priority

Y
Vehicle clear-out
solution

End

Fig. 2. Workflow of road execution lane reservation.

The concepts in SAC are defined as follows:
• Actor Network: Actor Network is responsible for deterministic policy learning; it inputs the current state and
outputs an action.
• Critic Network: Critic Network helps evaluate the longterm cumulative rewards of each state-action pair.
• Target Network: Target Network is a copy of the Critic
network for stable training.
• Reply Buffer: Use the experience reply buffer for storing previous experience samples to smooth training and
reduce sample correlation.
Figure 3 depicts the SACRP approach’s framework. The
agent sends the action produced by the actor network to the
closest RSU of the EV in each step. The vehicles on the
appropriate road are then controlled by the fog using the
lane reservation module to reserve an emergency lane for the
EV. The agent interacts with the environment once the EV
reaches the predetermined point to determine the observation
and reward values for the current step. The agent updates the
actor and critic networks based on the replay buffer method.
Algorithm 1 describes the whole pseudo-code of the framework for dynamic path planning and traffic scheduling. In Line
1, we first initialize the actor and critic networks. In Line
2, we initialize two target networks. In Line 3, we initialize
the replay buffer. Line 5 creates a random contingency in
the map and initializes the environment. In Lines 7-10, the
generated action triggers the execution of the lane reservation
module, which reserves the lane for EVs through vehicle lane
changes, vehicle clear-outs, and signal control. EV travels
at top speed on the designated vacant lane until it moves
to the next state and receives the reward. The experience is
stored in the experience replay buffer in Line 10. When the
buffer data is bigger than the threshold mini-size, a randomized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Actor Network

Environment

Action probabilities

Agent

Parameters j

EV

Log
Energy distribution state

Update
Minimize

Lane
reservation
data

Action

Action

log(p (a|s))

State

Reward

State transtion

Loss
function
Minimize

Real-time
traffic data

Store transitions

Q(s,a)

Critic Network

Critic Network

Action value function

Action value function

Parameters q1

Parameters q2

Energy distribution state

Energy distribution state

Experience Replay
Minibatch

Sample

log(p (a|s))

Minimize
Update

Experience pool

Loss
function

Q(s,a)

Fig. 3. Framework of SACRP.

algorithm samples K experiences in Line 13. The actor and
critic networks are then updated by the loss function in Lines
16–18, respectively, before the target network is updated (i.e.,
Line 18).

•

•

IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
This section introduces the built path planning and lane
reservation simulator. Detailed descriptions of baseline techniques and evaluation metrics follow. The performance of the
suggested emergency vehicle rapid passage approach (SACRP)
using the simulated regional scenario is then assessed.
A. Experiment Setting
We run simulations of our SACRP using the open-source
simulation software SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility).
SUMO is a flexible, open-source, and portable traffic simulation tool that handles diverse kinds of transportation at a tiny,
continuous level. It provides auxiliary tools for automating
basic traffic simulation activities like network construction,
route planning, visualization, and emissions analysis. As a
result, SUMO is a good choice for creating traffic control
models. We use a road network region with 5 km of length
and 5 km of breadth for our simulation studies. SUMO allows
us to successfully show the viability and usefulness of our
suggested strategy in urban road network traffic circumstances
despite certain simplifications compared to an entirely urban
scenario.
B. Performance Evaluation
In order to evaluate the SACRP approach, the following
three approaches are proposed for comparison:

•

•

A* algorithm: This approach uses the A* algorithm to
plan a path for the emergency vehicle (EV) before it
departs [9].
PERDQN-PP: This approach uses deep reinforcement
learning algorithm the prioritized experience replay deep
Q-network to plan a real-time path for EVs [11].
CPPTS: This approach for path planning relies on traffic
data at the time of the EV’s departure, so it does not
guarantee that the vehicle will take the most optimal path.
Additionally, this approach reserves lanes according to
predetermined rules and only notifies ordinary vehicles
(OVs) if they need to switch lanes. However, it does not
manage the lane-changing process for OVs [18].
SACRP: Our approach relies on real-time traffic data and
uses a soft actor-critic-based (SAC-based) algorithm to
plan the optimal path for EV continually. We consider
traffic density, number of vehicles on the road, initial
state, speed limit, and safety distance limit for lane
changes.

We use the response time of the EV with a conventional path
planning algorithm under the A* algorithm as a benchmark.
When the deep reinforcement learning-based path planning
algorithm PERDQN-PP is used, the average speed of EV
in the traffic scenario is increased by 8.8%. It is clear that
reinforcement learning-based path planning helps EV maintain
a stable speed and significantly solves the problem of EV
arrival delay due to deceleration and parking. The average
speed of EV in our proposed scheduling is significantly
reduced by 102.4% compared to the above approaches. The
efficiency improvement implies the value of the proposed
lane reservation and path planning algorithm. Figure 4 shows
the EV average speed and the corresponding response time.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: SAC-based SACRP Approach
1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8

9

10
11
12
13

14

15

16

17

18

19
20
21
22

Initialize critic networks Qω 1 (s, a), Qω 2 (s, a), and
actor network πθ (s) with random parameters
ω1 , ω2 , θ;
′
′
Intialize target networks Qω 1 (s, a), Qω 2 (s, a) by
′
copying parameter ω1′ ← ω1 , ω2 ← ω2;
Initialize reply buffer R;
for episode e = 1 to E do
Initialize s(t);
for step t = 1 to T do
Selection action with at = πθ (s);
Obtain the lane reservation scheme using Lane
Reservation Module;
Execute action at and observe reward rt , new
state st+1 ;
Store transition tuple (st , at , rt , st+1 ) in R;
if the replay buffer is full then
for epoch k = 1 to K do
Sample mini-batch of N transitions
(s, a, r, s′ ) from R;
For each tuple, compute
′
yi = ri + γminj=1,2 Qω j (si+1 , ai+1 ) −
αlogπθ (ai+1 |si+1 ) with the target
network, where ai+1 ∼ πθ (·|si+1 );
Both critic networks are updated as
follows: for j = 1, 2, minimize the
loss function
PN
′
L = N1 i=1 (yi − Qω j (si , ai ))2 ;
Use the heavy parameter technique to
sample action e
ai , and then use the
following loss function to update the
current Actor
Pnetwork:
N
Lπ (θ) = N1 i=1 α log πθ (e
ai |si ) −
minj=1,2 Qω j (si , e
ai );
Update the coefficient of the entropy
regularization term;
Update target network:
′
′
ω1 ← τ ω1 + (1 − τ )ω1 ω2 ,
′
′
′
τ ω1 + (1 − τ )ω1 ω2 ← τ ω2 + (1 − τ )ω2 ;
end for
end if
end for
end for

parking under the scheduling of the CPPTS algorithm is 2
(i.e., waiting for the road ahead to complete lane reservation).
The number of the EV parking under the scheduling of the
SACRP algorithm is 1, which greatly ensures the stability of
EV driving. The results show that the SACRP approach has
excellent stability.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Comparison of Average Speed, Number of Parking, Response Time
and Parking Time for EV under different approaches.

In general, there is an apparent correspondence between
vehicle density and time in urban transportation scenarios. In
order to obtain the performance of SACRP under different
vehicle densities and different times of the day, we designed
24 sets of experiments using time-based units. Figure 5 shows
EV’s average response time and average travel speed at
different time for the agreed trips using different path planning
approaches. Notably, EV has the shortest response times in the
afternoon and evening (i.e., after 10:00 PM and before 6:00
AM) and the most extended response times during peak hours
(i.e., 6:00-8:00 AM and 5:00 - 7:00 PM). It is interesting
to note that all scheduling strategies perform well at night.
The city’s traffic density distribution and this occurrence are
consistent. Expectedly, the average speed of EV has the same
pattern.

(a)
The result demonstrates that the EV can smoothly go along
the path that SACRP has chosen. PERDQN-PP and CPPTS
final response time are similar, but the average speed differs
significantly. This is because the planned initial paths become
less than excellent in complex dynamic traffic scenarios,
causing the EV to travel different distances. The number of
the EV parking under the scheduling of the A* algorithm
is 6. The number of the EV parking under the scheduling
of the PERDQN-PP algorithm is 4. The number of the EV

(b)

Fig. 5. The illustration of (a) comparison of the average response time
of the EV using different approaches in the daytime; the illustration of (b)
comparison of the average speed of the EV in the daytime.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a comprehensive approach
that integrates path planning and lane reservation to minimize emergency vehicles (EVs) response time during urban
emergencies. Building upon the distributed intelligent transportation system (DITS) foundation, we have introduced a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

soft actor-critic-based EV rapid passage approach (SACRP).
SACRP encompasses a cooperative lane reservation module
and a real-time path planning module, effectively reducing the
response time of EVs. The cooperative lane reservation module
strategically coordinated road reservations by considering realtime road data. Additionally, in the real-time path planning
module, SACRP has incorporated lane reservation as part
of the observation in the soft actor-critic-based algorithm.
Simulation results have shown that the SACRP helps to reduce
EV’s response time and minimize interference with OVs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62272357), Key Research
and Development Program of Hubei (No. 2022BAA052),
Key Research and Development Program of Hainan (No.
ZDYF2021GXJSO14), Key-Area Research and Development
Program of Guangdong Province (2020B0101130003), Science Foundation of Chongqing of China (cstc2021jcyjmsxm4262), and Research Project of Chongqing Research
Institute of Wuhan University of Technology (ZD2021-04,
ZL2021-05). Jinfan Wang is the corresponding author.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. J. Hannoun, P. Murray-Tuite, K. Heaslip, and
T. Chantem, “Facilitating emergency response vehicles’
movement through a road segment in a connected vehicle
environment,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 3546–3557, 2018.
[2] K. S. Arikumar, S. B. Prathiba, S. Basheer, R. S.
Moorthy, A. Dumka, and M. Rashid, “V2x-based highly
reliable warning system for emergency vehicles,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 1950, 2023.
[3] T. Li, N. Wang, B. Jiang, and M. Zhang, “A bi-objective
lane reservation problem considering dynamic traffic
flow,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 367–381, 2022.
[4] P. Wu, L. Xu, A. D’Ariano, Y. Zhao, and C. Chu, “Novel
formulations and improved differential evolution algorithm for optimal lane reservation with task merging,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21 329–21 344, 2022.
[5] B. Liu, W. Han, E. Wang, S. Xiong, L. Wu, Q. Wang,
J. Wang, and C. Qiao, “Multi-agent attention double
actor-critic framework for intelligent traffic light control
in urban scenarios with hybrid traffic,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[6] M. Guo, P. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, and S. Askary, “A reinforcement learning approach for intelligent traffic signal
control at urban intersections,” in 2019 IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC). IEEE, 2019,
pp. 4242–4247.
[7] T. Chu, J. Wang, L. Codecà, and Z. Li, “Multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning for large-scale traffic signal
control,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1086–1095, 2019.

[8] B. Yang, Z. Ding, L. Yuan, J. Yan, L. Guo, and Z. Cai,
“A novel urban emergency path planning method based
on vector grid map,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 154 338–
154 353, 2020.
[9] N. A. M. Nordin, Z. A. Zaharudin, M. A. Maasar, and
N. A. Nordin, “Finding shortest path of the ambulance
routing: Interface of a algorithm using c# programming,”
in 2012 ieee symposium on humanities, science and
engineering research. IEEE, 2012, pp. 1569–1573.
[10] H. Wen, J. Wu, Y. Duan, W. Qi, and S. Zhao, “A
methodology of timing co-evolutionary path optimization for accident emergency rescue considering future
environmental uncertainty,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
131 459–131 472, 2019.
[11] L. Yan, P. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Hu, Y. Han, and J. Yao,
“Refined path planning for emergency rescue vehicles on
congested urban arterial roads via reinforcement learning
approach,” Journal of Advanced Transportation, vol.
2021, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[12] B. Liu, Y. Sheng, X. Shao, Y. Ji, W. Han, E. Wang, and
S. Xiong, “Collaborative intelligence enabled routing in
green iov: A grid and vehicle density prediction-based
protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communications
and Networking, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1012–1022, 2023.
[13] M. Rezaei, H. Noori, M. M. Razlighi, and M. Nickray,
“Refocus+: Multi-layers real-time intelligent route guidance system with congestion detection and avoidance,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 50–63, 2019.
[14] Z. Ning, J. Huang, and X. Wang, “Vehicular fog computing: Enabling real-time traffic management for smart
cities,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 1,
pp. 87–93, 2019.
[15] K. Liu, C. Liu, G. Yan, V. C. S. Lee, and J. Cao,
“Accelerating dnn inference with reliability guarantee in
vehicular edge computing,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, pp. 1–16, 2023.
[16] X. Shao, G. Hasegawa, M. Dong, Z. Liu, H. Masui, and
Y. Ji, “An online orchestration mechanism for generalpurpose edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Services
Computing, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 927–940, 2023.
[17] E. Wang, B. Liu, S. Lin, F. Shen, T. Bao, J. Zhang,
J. Wang, A. W. Sadek, and C. Qiao, “Double graph
attention actor-critic framework for urban bus-pooling
system,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 5313–5325, 2023.
[18] V.-L. Nguyen, R.-H. Hwang, and P.-C. Lin, “Controllable path planning and traffic scheduling for emergency
services in the internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 8, pp.
12 399–12 413, 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

