2021 Fifth International Conference On Intelligent Computing in Data Sciences (ICDS) | 978-1-6654-4238-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICDS53782.2021.9626720

Reinforcement Learning-based Unpredictable
Emergency Events
Omar Elfahim

El Mehdi Ben Laoula

Mohamed Youssfi

2IACS Laboratory, ENSET
University Hassan II of Casablanca.
Mohammedia, Morocco
elfahimomar95@gmail.com

2IACS Laboratory, ENSET
University Hassan II of Casablanca.
Mohammedia, Morocco
mehdi.benlaoula@gmail.com

2IACS Laboratory, ENSET
University Hassan II of Casablanca.
Mohammedia, Morocco
med@youssfi.net

Oussama Barakat

Mohammed Mestari

Nanomedicine Lab
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
oussama.barakat@univ-fcomte.fr

2IACS Laboratory, ENSET
University Hassan II of Casablanca.
Mohammedia, Morocco
mestari@enset-media.ac.ma

Abstract—The vehicle routing problems is one of the wildly
known transportation problems. It used to minimize the total
traveling time of vehicles by choosing the shortest path. Defining
the routing of the vehicles in the real world is a complex task to
perform because of the different constraints to handle. The aim
of this paper is to develop a dynamic simulation environment
using Java for testing Q-learning approach with consideration
of overall and dynamic performance. We propose Q-learning
based approach in order to improve the transportation facilities
for emergency response activity. With the aim of minimizing the
time from emergency call being waited for a relief or a service to
the dispatch point. The results showed that optimisation scheme,
developed by the RL agents based on Q-learning approach using
simulated environment, has the potential to offer an accurate
scheme to find the optimum route.
Index Terms—Reinforcement Learning, Q-Learning, Transportation, Vehicle Routing Problems.

I. I NTRODUCTION
COVID-19 pandemic and the variety of unpredictable
events, such as natural disasters and wildfire have impacted
human security and safety, in particular, claim many human
lives. To deal with them, the transportation networks play an
important factor in having an efficient emergency response
plan [30]. Human survival is dependent on travel time for
emergency supplies to arrive where needed, where the travel
time is dependent on the different constraints of the transportation networks.
In recent years, artificial intelligence technologies which
are based on creating and developing intelligent systems have
brought further development to several fields such as healthcare transportation, manufacturing, energy, education, financial
modelling and economy etc. to solve complex problems arising
from different fields. Machine learning is a subcategory of
AI which is one of the most important methods in artificial intelligence that allows a machine to develop intelligent
systems and algorithms. Machine learning can be divided

into three major classes of algorithms including supervised
learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning
[18]. Supervised learning and unsupervised learning methods
are the most widely used machine-learning method, based on
training the models using pre-collected and historical data,
where the aim was to produce a prediction. One high-impact
area of progress in supervised learning is deep neural network
(DNN) which was initiated by a multi-layer Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) the one that was used in several scientific
applications nowadays and has attracted more attention in
recent years. Some of the mostly used in deep learning are
Feedforward Deep Networks (FDN), Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [27] is widely used for dealing with spatial disruption data, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) is
approriate for handling time series data, Long-short Term
Memory (LSTM) is a special adaptation of RNN that is able
of learning long-term dependencies. However, reinforcement
learning differs from other machine learning algorithms does
not rely on a dataset. The most important aspect of RL is how
a learning agent can extract optimal operational knowledge
from historical data through continuous interacting with its
environment and take action to solve a real problem facing
and trying to maximize rewards. The four major components
in Reinforcement Learning are agent or self-learner, environment, reward and action. An agent who is characterized
by autonomy, sociability and have the ability to perceive
and observe the environment in order to act in way to
maximize the rewards and minimize the penalties. Therefore,
reinforcement learning is more convenient in the resolution of
decision-making, optimization and control problems [16]. such
as, robotic control[14] and a lots of problems in inventory,
smart manufacturing, healthcare domains [22], and natural
language processing. Reinforcement Learning is an emergent
technology which has been able to solve the problem of
the optimal task and resource scheduling dynamically. The
dynamic scheduling problems [16] in healthcare services and

978-1-6654-4238-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

are quite more complex than prediction and static problems
because there are increasing complexities, uncertainties and
many forms of disruption mainly related to emergencies and
several ambiguous events possibly occurring randomly over
time. Deep Reinforcement Learning is an enhancement of
typical reinforcement learning which is able to combine reinforcement learning with deep neural network. Artificial neural
networks are used to build the intelligent policy [10]. DRL
performs better and is able to handle the high dimensional
problems and continuous state space well [24]. As a result,
DRL has won lots of success with video games like AlphaGo,
a game developed by Google DeepMind [28]. Furthermore,
DRL has become one of the most fascinating research areas
in AI. It provides its values in many practical applications such
as Google Brain is one program developped to train robots to
open doors and gather objects by their own. DRL is also used
by Uber in order to teach Grand Theft Auto to use real cars
on real roads. The routing optimization in transportation has
been spanning many types of problems from the more basic
travelling salesman problems, to more complicated multivehicle routing problem. To the best knowledge of the authors,
there are lot of research efforts dedicated to applying and using
the RL and DRL algorithms to deal with these problems [14].
In summary, the contribution of this research is a developed
Q-learning algorithms to optimize time travel and the shortest
paths of emergency supplies to arrive where needed. Modelling
dynamic simulation environment for vehicle and its basic
components which consist of the environment and its states,
self-learning as well as possible actions and rewards.
The rest of the paper is organized as follow. section II
provides an application of Q-learning in transportation research studies. Then section III presents description of the
reinforcement learning principles and its methods, especially,
Q- learning one. Section IV describes agent-simulation environments and discuss its results. Finally, section V makes
conclusions and perspectives for future research.

passengers standing long a real-world metro line. Furthermore,
several studies have been used successfully Q-learning in Train
Timetable Rescheduling [15], Traffic flow optimization [19].
In order to improve vehicle routing planning system, a Qvalue based dynamic programming method was used to find
the optimal travel time from every dispatch point (intersection)
to every destination point [23]. Recent studies [9], [21] have
applied Q-learning methods on traffic light control problem by
designing the raod as state and action defined the operation
on light. To get a larger number of vehicles in the traffic
management system, Q-learning [6], [8] and deep Q-learning
[11] are proposed. In a fully described paper, Ammar Haydari
[31] reviewed a recent deep reinforcement learning (RL)-based
traffic control applications. His paper focuses on traffic signal
control (TSC) applications based on (deep) RL, which have
been extensively investigated in the literature and presented in
control models and approriate algorithms.
III. R EINFOCEMENT L EARNING METHODS
Reinfocement Learning methodology oficially comes from a
Markov Decision Process (MDP). It is a general mathematical
framework for sequential decision making algorithms. MDP
consists of 5 elements in a tuple:
• A set of states of the environment S
• A set of all possible actions that the agent can take A,
• Transition function T (st+1 | st , at ) according to a stateaction pair for each time t to a distribution of next state
st+1 ,
• Reward function R (st , at , st+1 ) that gives the prize for
taking action at from state st while transitioning to the
next state st+1
• Discount factor γ between 0 and 1 for future prizes.

II. R ELATED WORKS
Q-learning is one of the most known and widely used
algorithm of the value based reinforcement Learning. With
the recent advancement in RL methodology and applications
Q-learning has already been successively used to solve several
transportation issues, such as Route optimization from travelling salesman problems to route planning system and to more
complicated multi-vehicle routing problem. To solve a route
planning system paper [7] proposed a Q-learning approach for
minimizing the total travel distance of vehicles and obtain the
shortest time routes. In order to enable each agent completes
its assigned tasks based on interacting with other agents and
the environment to achieve the overall goal, a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms based on Q-learning is
proposed in which all agents negotiate and share the available
information with other [26]. In paper [5] Q-learning method
was developed to deal with the nonlinear optimization problem
of passenger congestion and train operation on an urban rail
transit line, with the aim of minimizing the penalty value of

Fig. 1: Interactions between the agents and environment in
reinforcement learning.
The essential Markov property is that given the current state
st , the next state st+1 of system do not take into consideration
the previous states (s0 , s1 , . . . , st−1 ) . In control systems such
as transportation ones, MDP models are mostly episodic. Wich
means that MDP model system has a final point for each
episode based on the end time T or the end state sT . The goal
of an MDP agent is to find the best policy π ∗ that maximises
the intended cumulative prise E [Rt | s, π] for each state s and
cumulative discounted prise (i.e., return)
Rt =

T
−1
X

γ i rt+i

i=0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(1)

where the discount factor γ which gives a clear idea about the
importance of future rewards or prises.
In reinforcement learning, the environment can be modelled
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). Reinforcement Learning is an area of machine learning that develops approximate
methods for solving dynamic optimisation problems the main
concern of reinforcement learning is how software or robot
agent ought to take actions in an environment in order to
maximize the reward and minimizing the cost and penality.
Reinforcement learning considers the setup where an agent
interacts with the environment in discrete time steps with the
goal of learning a reward-maximizing behavior policy and
minimize the cost. At each time step t with a given state s the
agent takes an action a according to its policy π(s) = a and
receives the reward r moving to the next state s0 .
In general, RL agent can behave as two different ways: the
first one called model-based RL by knowing / learning the
transition probability T from state st to st+1 , and rely on
forward prediction for planning through the model and generating synthetic experience [13], [25]. Model-based methods
learn from similar data efficiency [2]. The second one is called
model-free RL by examining the environment without learning
a transition model (no knowledge of transitions and rewards).
The learner acts in the real environment in order to learn, the
agent relies on trial and error. Model free RL approaches do
not fucos on the static environment where the states are fully
observed but tries to estimate the states, value function, and
reward function. We simply divide model-free RL algorithms
into two scenarios as value-based and policy-based.
The most popular RL algorithms as shown in figure 6
include Q-learning, Monte Carlo, Temporal Difference(TD)
Learning, SARSA (State–Action–Reward–State–Action).
More advanced and robust techniques, which integrates deep
learning approach with RL are DQN (Deep Q), DDQN
(double Q), NAF (Normalized Advantage Functions), Actor
Critic, A3C (Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic) and
DDPG (Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients) etc.

Fig. 2: Reinforcement Learning Methods.
Value-based methods Value function gives an idea about
how good a state is for the agent by estimating the exact value
(i.e., expected return) of being in a state s with respect to

particular following policy π, we can define V π (s) formally
by (2)
V π (s) = E [Rt | s, π]
(2)
Similarly, the action-value function determines how good it
is to be in state s and taking the action a (i.e., expected return
in a state-action pair) (3)
Qπ (s, a) = E [Rt | s, a, π]

(3)

the main objective of reinforcement Learning is to find a
policy that achieves a lot of rewards over the following way.
The optimum value function V ∗ (s) describes the optimized
state value function over the policy for all states (4)
V ∗ (s) = max V π (s), ∀s ∈ S.
π

(4)

The same optimal action-value function calculated similarly
to the optimal value function, denoted Q∗ (s, a), and defined
as (5)
Q∗ (s, a) = max Qπ (s, a), ∀s ∈ S.
(5)
a

In Value based methods, policy can be derived by selecting
greedy actions which maximizes the Q-value function (6)
π ∗ (s, a) = argmaxa Q∗ (s, a), ∀s ∈ S.

(6)

Q-learning approach
Value-iteration methods are often executed on-policy if
value function of the policy estimated using data that are
generated by following this policy. the value of generating
policy such as SARSA, while off-policy which is estimate the
value of another policy that is different from the one being
followed. This approach have demonstrated sample-efficient
performance in lot of domains [12], [29]. Popular Algorithms
are:Q-Learning [20], which is an off-policy Temporal Difference and SARSA [18]. This both algorithms are an off-policy
and on-policy Temporal Difference respectively, where used
the action-value function as an important part of reinforcement learning Q(s, a) instead of the value function V (s).
The Q-value function is utilized to evaluate the performance
and effectiveness of the particular actions and state. The Qvalue function is stored in Q-table. The agent updates their
action by maximizing Q-values over the action. Its one-step
updating rule based on iterating the Bellman equation, which
is described by Eq. 7
h
i
0 0
Qt+1 (s, a) = Qt (s, a)+αt R(s, a) + γ max
Q
(s
,
a
)
−
Q
(s,
a)
t
t
a0
(7)
where α ∈ [0, 1] is learning rate showed the level of
dependence between the past knowledge and the current
knowledge, determines the step size of the movement in the
optimal direction in each training iteration. and R(s, a) +
γ maxa0 Qt (s0 , a0 ).
Fig.3 reflects the interaction between agents and their environment in Q-learning. The agents interact with the environment by performing some actions then the environment
responds to these actions by modifying it state. While, the
environment also interacts with the agents to determine how

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

much reward and penality are obtain by performing these
actions. The principal purpose of the agents is to act efficiently
by learning a good action that maximize the sum of the
cumulative rewards.
Algorithm 1 Q-Learning Algorithm
Require:
. Initialisation
States X = {1, . . . , nx }
Actions A = {1, . . . , na },
A:X ⇒A
Reward function R : X × A → R
Black-box (probabilistic) transition function T : X × A →
X
Learning rate α ∈ [0, 1], typically α = 0.1
Discounting factor γ ∈ [0, 1]
procedure QL EARNING(X , A, R, T , α, γ)
Initialize Q : X × A → R arbitrarily
while Q is not converged do
Start in state s ∈ X
while s is not terminal do
Calculate π according to Q and exploration strategy (e.g. π(x) ← argmaxa Q(x, a))
a ← π(s)
r ← R(s, a)
. Receive the reward
s0 ← T (s, a)
. Receive the new state
Q(s0 , a) ← (1 − α) · Q(s, a) + α · (r + γ ·
0
maxa0 Q(s , a0 ))
s ← s0
end while
end while
return Q
end procedure

Exploration and Exploitation The most fundamental theoretical issues in RL are exploration-exploitation trade-off
dilemma, since exploring the environment enables the agent
to learn more about the environment in order to improve the
estimation of the value of the non greedy action exploiting
the environment. One straightforward method is -greedy
strategies, where the probability  of taking a random action,
otherwise the agent exploits current information saved in the
Q-values and takes an optimal action. The -greedy methods
can be given by Equation

π (a0 ) =



1−ε
ε

a = arg maxa0 Q(s, a)
otherwise

where  is random exploration rate between 0 and 1. There are
other simple strategies of balancing exploration and exploitation, such as upper confidence bound (UCB) and Bayesian
reasoning methods [3]. In the beginning, agents ignore the
environment where they progress. That is why the learner has
to intial the  close to 1 to enssure that agents could explore the
external environment. After, once information recieved from
the environment the agent can exploit the environment.

Fig. 3: Q-learning agents/environment interaction.

IV. E XPERIMENTS
To use reinforcement learning and Q-learning in order to
solve a problem, in particular, the following five fundamental
components must be defined: environment and its states,
agent and its possible behaviors, and the prizes (rewards).
The agent investigates the surroundings and understands the
reinforcement signals it receives, then chooses actions that
maximize the award based on previous experience. Table I
summarizes the RL components of the study. To implement Qlearning algorithm a customized simulation Environment tool
based on world coordinate system, possible dispatch locations
and creating incidents was developed using JAVA. A special
serie of small (30 × 30) maps is constructed with random
obstacles define by red color. The color represents different
penalties which the agent gets being in the obstacles position.
RL components
Agent
Environment
Policy
Reward
Q-value
State (St )
α
γ

Component usage
Installed in nodes
Dynamic transportation web
Routing policy from present to destination node
Gain given to a position after executing action in state
Total prizes cumulates from present node to destination node
The node that the vehicle passes through the network,
this is followed by geographical position of the vehicle.
Learning rate for the Q-values
Discount rate for the reward value

TABLE I: RL components of the study.
A. State
The state space is defined in fig.5 as S = (s1 , s2 , s3 ...sn ),
which determined the number of positions in the environment
roads, as st which shows how the current positions is in the
environment at the time step t. Therefore, 2D-grid with d
dimension has d ∗ d states. For example a 2D-grid with 30
in its dimension has 900 states as shown in Fig 5.
B. Action
Action is defined as the directions that the emergency
response vehicle can take, the job of the agent is to minimise
the time and distance from dispatch point to the accident
location. There are four possible action (move east, move west,
move south, and move nourth), moreover, moving diagonally

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

also includes the diagonal direction (move South-East, SouthWest, North-East and North-West). When one of the actions
sets available is chosen, the vehicle must take only that
direction.
Direction
Nourth ↑
South ↓
East →
West ←
Nourth-East %
Nourth-West South-East &
South-West .

Action
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7
a8

Row vectors
[−1, 0]
[1, 0]
[0, 1]
[0, −1]
[−1, 1]
[−1, −1]
[1, 1]
[1, −1]

TABLE II: The action sets

(a) Initial Environment

Fig. 4: Possible direction sets.

(b) Test Run Environment

C. Reward
The reward (or prize) is what the agent may receive after
doing an action. While the agent operating and relocating in
the simulation environment, aims at gaining as many overall
rewards as possible. On the one hand, minimise the the punishment receives from obstacles. On the other hand, additionally
if the agent reaches the destination, it gains the essential part
of the rewards. Finally, the agent finished the learning phase
and becomes forced to reach the incident position with the
shortest path.
(c) Diagonal Directions


Fig. 5: Simulation Environment
if position =goal
 100,
−10, if position = punishment red & orange color
R(s, a) =

0,
if otherwise
patient and the vehicle are also shown on the maze given in
D. Environment
figure 5. when test run of the environment and the vehicle
Through the environment state, these basic environment allocated to a random location (each run will re-allocate to a
items can be used to train and test the Q-learning algorithm. different dispatch point), Q-learning agent start at that point
The simulation environment is started for the agent’s training takes an action at each simulation step based on the Qtable,
and testing using the Q-learning algorithm. The simulation states of the block (penality, wall or free). The vehicle takes
environment starts with the following objects: dispatch point, the shortest route to reach the final position.
The simulated environment and RL agent were developed
which is where the vehicle is assigned, destination point,
using
programming language Java with random acting agent.
which is where the accident occurs. The x and y coordinates
In
our
experiments we train the agent over the 3000 episodes,
are used to indicate the location of the emergency response
Another
parameters of the implementation was tested as folvehicle, while all penalties, walls, and uncertainty are set to
lows:
red blocks. The vehicle can be dispatched to any dispatch
location in its initial form. The location of the incident or the
• the acrion space is defined and is shown in Table II

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

•
•
•
•
•

α = 0.1 -The learning rate.
γ = 0.9 -The discount factor.
decay rate = 0.005 -Exponential decay rate for exploration probability.
Initial Q-values equal to zero
Exploration Method based on Exponential decay rate(greedy), the agent learns and acts randomly by increasing
the value of . After that allows the agent selects by
referencing Q-table with highest value by increasing
the degree of exploration behaviour which depends on
increasing the value of  as shown in Figure 6

(a) Average total rewards

Fig. 6: Exploration-exploitation trade-off.
The result shows in figure 5, at each random allocation
points the agent starts in takes the shortest path to the goal
position. The agent performs accurately using Q-learning
algorithms.
Fig. 7 depicts two learning curves for the average total
delay and reward scenario: As we can observe, the learning
curve shows in Figure 7.(a) that average total rewards value
for the agent being stranded improves with the increase of
the number of training episodes, since the exploration rate
decreases with exploitation learning to achieve the goal.7.(b)
When the exploration rate is decreasing the learning agent
learns takes the actions that maximize the Q-value function,
which leads to a shorter total delay. the penalty value of the
vehicle converges at the 1000th iteration.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this research, a Q-learning algorithm for transportation
of dangerous materials and Emergency response activities
is presented. In particular, relevant Q-learning components
was highlighted, the sets of environment states and agent
actions and reward, with the objective of finding the optimal
path to lower total travel time of the vehicle. The results of
experiments showed that the Q-learning algorithm gave an
accurate and reasonable path.
This pilot study is the key to several important future directions to make this method applicable in several applications in
real world, including public transportation, network Routing,

(b) Total penalty

Fig. 7: Learning curves obtained with Q-learning
scheduling healthcare services, especially, home healthcare
system to minimize the travel time. Furthermore, emergency
healthcare systems will be integrated to deal with emergencies
and disasters that have an impact on the health of the population, such as COVID-19 pandemic situations. Additionally, we
will add more constraints and conditions using a dynamic and
complex environment. This study will allow us to test other
Deep reinforcement learning and RL methods based on multiagents system and compare performance of reinforcement
learning techniques with classical methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project is a part of a project supported by cofinancing from the CNRST (Centre National pour la Recherche
Scientifique et Technique) and the Hassan II University of
Casablanca, Morocco. The project is selected in the context
of a call for projects entitled ”Scientific and Technological

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Research Support Program related to the theme of COVID19”.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Bellman. Dynamic programming. Science, 153(3731):34-37, 1966.
[2] C. Finn and S. Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion.
In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 2786-2793. IEEE, 2017.
[3] M. Ghavamzadeh, S. Mannor, J. Pineau, and A. Tamar. Bayesian
reinforcement learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04436,
2016.
[4] E. Ipek, O. Mutlu, J. F. Martinez, and R. Caruana. Self-optimizing memory con- trollers: A reinforcement learning approach. ACM SIGARCH
Computer Architecture News, 36(3):39-50, 2008.
[5] Z. Jiang, J. Gu, W. Fan, W. Liu, and B. Zhu. Q-learning approach to
coordinated optimization of passenger in ow control with train skipstopping on a urban rail transit line. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
127:1131-1142, 2019.
[6] H. Joo, S. H. Ahmed, and Y. Lim. Traffic signal control for smart cities
using reinforce- ment learning. Computer Communications, 154:324330, 2020.
[7] J. K. Lim, J. M. Lim, K. Yoshimoto, K. H. Kim, and T. Takahashi.
Designing guide- path networks for automated guided vehicle system
by using the q-learning technique. Computers & industrial engineering,
44(1):1-17, 2003.
[8] W. Liu, G. Qin, Y. He, and F. Jiang. Distributed cooperative reinforcement learning- based traffic signal control that integrates v2x networks’ dynamic clustering. IEEE transactions on vehicular technology,
66(10):8667-8681, 2017.
[9] P. Mannion, J. Duggan, and E. Howley. An experimental review of
reinforcement learn- ing algorithms for adaptive traffic signal control.
Autonomic road transport support systems, pages 47-66, 2016.
[10] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature,
518(7540):529-533, 2015.
[11] S. S. Mousavi, M. Schukat, and E. Howley. Traffic light control using
deep policy- gradient and value-function-based reinforcement learning.
IET Intelligent Transport Systems, 11(7):417-423, 2017.
[12] R. Munos, T. Stepleton, A. Harutyunyan, and M. G. Bellemare.
Safe and efficient off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.02647, 2016.
[13] A. Nagabandi, G. Kahn, R. S. Fearing, and S. Levine. Neural network
dynamics for model-based deep reinforcement learning with model-free
ne-tuning. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 7559-7566. IEEE, 2018.
[14] N. Parvez Farazi, T. Ahamed, L. Barua, and B. Zou. Deep reinforcement
learning and transportation research: A comprehensive review. arXiv eprints, pages arXiv-2010, 2020.
[15] D. Šemrov, R. Marsetič,M. Žura, L. Todorovski, & M. Srdic . Reinforcement learning approach for train rescheduling on a single-track railway.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 86, 250-267, 2016.
[16] C. Shyalika, T. Silva, and A. Karunananda. Reinforcement learning in
dynamic task scheduling: A review. SN Computer Science, 1(6):1-17,
2020.
[17] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[18] T. L. Thorpe and C. W. Anderson. Tra c light control using sarsa with
three state representations. Technical report, Citeseer, 1996.
[19] E. Walraven, M. T. Spaan, and B. Bakker. Traffic ow optimization: A
reinforcement learning approach. Engineering Applications of Arti
cial Intelligence, 52:203-212, 2016.
[20] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):279292, 1992.
[21] H. Wei, G. Zheng, H. Yao, and Z. Li. Intellilight: A reinforcement
learning approach for intelligent traffic light control. In Proceedings
of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, pages 2496-2505, 2018.
[22] C. Yu, J. Liu, and S. Nemati. Reinforcement learning in healthcare: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08796, 2019. 496-2505, 2018.

[23] S. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Li, S. Mabu, and K. Hirasawa. Q value-based dynamic
programming with sarsa learning for real time route guidance in large
scale road networks. In The 2012 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1-7. IEEE,2012.
[24] D. Zhang, X. Han, and C. Deng. Review on the research and practice of
deep learning and reinforcement learning in smart grids. CSEE Journal
of Power and Energy Systems, 4(3):362-370, 2018.
[25] M. Zhang, S. Vikram, L. Smith, P. Abbeel, M. Johnson, and S. Levine.
Solar: Deep structured representations for model-based reinforcement
learning. In International Con- ference on Machine Learning, pages
7444-7453. PMLR, 2019.
[26] M. Zolfpour-Arokhlo, A. Selamat, S. Z. M. Hashim, and H. Afkhami.
Modeling of route planning system based on q value-based dynamic
programming with multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms. Engineering Applications of Arti
cial Intelligence, 29:163-177, 2014.
[27] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, & G. E Hinton. Imagenet classification with
deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 25, 1097-1105, 2012.
[28] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre et al., “Mastering
the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature, vol.
529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, Jan. 2016.
[29] Gaskett, C., Wettergreen, D., & Zelinsky, A. (1999, December). Qlearning in continuous state and action spaces. In Australasian joint
conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 417-428). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
[30] Edrissi, A., Nourinejad, M., & Roorda, M. J. (2015). Transportation
network reliability in emergency response. Transportation research part
E: logistics and transportation review, 80, 56-73.
[31] Ammar Haydari, Yasin Yilmaz. ”Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Intelligent Transportation Systems: A Survey”, IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2020

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:04:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

