Joint Optimization of Traffic Signal Control and Vehicle Routing in Signalized Road Networks
using Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
Xianyue Penga,b,c,d, Hang Gaoe, Gengyue Hana,c,d, Hao Wang*,a,c,d and Michael Zhangb
aJiangsu

Key Laboratory of Urban ITS, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211189, China; bthe Department of Civil and

Environmental Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA; cJiangsu Province Collaborative Innovation
Center of Modern Urban Traffic Technologies, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211189, China; dSchool of Transportation, Southeast
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211189, China; ethe Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

Abstract
Urban traffic congestion is a critical predicament that plagues modern road networks. To alleviate this
issue and enhance traffic efficiency, traffic signal control and vehicle routing have proven to be effective
measures. In this paper, we propose a joint optimization approach for traffic signal control and vehicle
routing in signalized road networks. The objective is to enhance network performance by
simultaneously controlling signal timings and route choices using Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement
Learning (MADRL). Signal control agents (SAs) are employed to establish signal timings at
intersections, whereas vehicle routing agents (RAs) are responsible for selecting vehicle routes. By
establishing relevance between agents and enabling them to share observations and rewards, interaction
and cooperation among agents are fostered, which enhances individual training. The Multi-Agent
Advantage Actor-Critic algorithm is used to handle multi-agent environments, and Deep Neural
Network (DNN) structures are designed to facilitate the algorithm's convergence. Notably, our work is
the first to utilize MADRL in determining the optimal joint policy for signal control and vehicle routing.
Numerical experiments conducted on the modified Sioux network demonstrate that our integration of
signal control and vehicle routing outperforms controlling signal timings or vehicles' routes alone in
enhancing traffic efficiency.

Key words: traffic congestion; signalized road networks; vehicle routing; signal control; multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning
1. Introduction
Traffic signal control and vehicle routing are recognized as effective measures to alleviate traffic
congestion and enhance traffic efficiency in urban road networks. The signal settings are intrinsically
linked to the route decisions made by drivers. This is because the traffic control system is designed to
improve network performance, which is accomplished through a comprehensive analysis of the network
flow patterns that encompasses drivers' route decisions. Conversely, particular signal controls can have
an impact on the cost of different routes, prompting drivers to select particular routes for selfoptimization or to achieve system optimization. The mutually beneficial objectives and interdependence
of signal control and vehicle routing make collaborative optimization achievable, resulting in a
substantial enhancement in network performance.
Connected and autonomous vehicles possess the capability to establish dependable two-way
communications between vehicles and infrastructure, enabling the possibility of achieving a system
optimum through synergistic vehicle routing and traffic signal control Li, Mirchandani, and Zhou
(2015). Fig.1 illustrates a simplified network and the influence of a collaborative strategy involving
signal control and vehicle routing. By rerouting the vehicles of (𝑂1 , 𝐷1 ), the arrival times of conflicting
vehicles in 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 are staggered, and optimized signal timings of 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 enables vehicles to
leave the intersection as soon as possible.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) demonstrates exceptional potential in managing dynamic and
complex environments, optimizing long-term performance, and making real-time decisions. As a result,

DRL has seen increasing applications in the field of intelligent transportation systems, including trafficsignal control, autonomous driving and traffic assignment(F. Yang et al. 2021a).

𝑂2

Time

𝑆1
𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒1

𝑆1
𝐷2

𝐷1

𝑂1

𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒2

𝑆2

𝐷1

𝑂2
𝐷2

𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ = {ሺ𝑂1 , 𝑆1 , 𝐷1 ሻ, ሺ𝑂1 , 𝑆2 , 𝐷1 ሻ
, ሺ𝑂2 , 𝑆1 , 𝑆2 , 𝐷2 ሻ}

𝑂1

𝑆2

Figure 1 Simplified example for the joint signal control and vehicle routing
Multi-agent DRL (MADRL) is a technique that involves multiple agents learning in a shared
environment(Grunitzki, Ramos, and Ieee 2020). Each agent takes actions to find the best rewards based
on its observations, while the rewards and observations are influenced by the actions of other agents.
This modeling approach is particularly suited for the joint signal control and vehicle routing problem,
in which signalized intersections and connected vehicles take actions to achieve their goals and
consider the behavior of others as the underlying dynamics of the environment. In other words, the
MADRL approach facilitates coordination and collaboration between agents in the road network to
find the optimal joint control policy.
This paper proposed a joint optimization of signal timings and vehicles’ routes for signalized
networks with time-varying demand. The optimal joint control policy is determined using a MADRL
method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a review of the relevant literature

in the field. Section 3 outlines the MADRL system's architecture, including the design of the signal
controller and routing controller, which are critical components of the proposed system. Section 4
presents the Multi-Agent Advantage Actor-Critic DRL(MAA2C) algorithm used for addressing the
joint control problem. Section 5 presents the results of numerical experiments and Section 6 concludes
the paper.
2. Related works
2.1. Research on Combined Signal Control and Vehicle Routing Problem
Due to the interdependence between signal settings and drivers’ behavior, the combined signal control
and vehicle routing problem has interested researchers for a long time. R. E Allsop (1974) was the first
to consider this interdependence, highlighting how signal settings impact the correlation between travel
cost and traffic flow, and then affects route selection. He proposed a theoretical framework where the
estimated results of traffic assignment (such as traffic flows) are treated as functions of the traffic control
parameters. Gazis (1974) suggested that optimal control for congested traffic requires two operations:
traffic allocation and signal settings. Several examples (Gazis 1974, D'Ans and Gazis 1976)
demonstrated the impact of signal settings on queue size. Akcelik and Maher (1977) explored the
interaction between route control and signal control, concluding that coupling signal control with route
control is superior to signal control alone as it converts user equilibrium to system optimal.
Joint optimization of signal control and vehicle routing can be categorized into two main
approaches: centralized control, which optimize the entire road network, and distributed control, which
focus on optimizing local regions. Appendix Table A.1 provides an overview of the detailed information
of related studies.

Centralized control aims to improve overall road network performance by optimizing signal timing
and flow patterns throughout the network. Iterative approaches, such as those proposed by Gartner
(1977), Wong and Yang (1999), Abdelfatah, Mahmassani, and Nrc (1998) and Ukkusuri, Doan, and
Aziz (2013) were among the initial and widely used methods employed for this purpose. These iterative
methods sequentially address the traffic assignment problem and signal control problem to obtain a
mutually consistent solution(R. E. Allsop and Charlesworth 1977, Charlesworth 1977). Iterative
optimization offers numerous practical benefits, as it leverages well-established and effective methods
for signal timing and traffic assignment. These methods enable realistic road network representation,
advanced travel cost estimation, and comprehensive signal timing plans. However, iterative algorithm
may not always converge(C. Lee and Machemehl 2005) and can only obtain local optima, potentially
resulting in suboptimal system performance (R. E. Allsop and Charlesworth 1977, Charlesworth 1977,
Dickson 1981, Marcotte 1983).
In addition to iterative methods, researchers have explored various approaches for centralized
control. These approaches include gradient-based optimization algorithms such as the gradient
projection algorithm (Sheffi and Powell 1983) and the bundle-based gradient method (Chiou 2014);
metaheuristic algorithms such as the genetic algorithm (Varia and Dhingra 2004, Yu, Ma, and Zhang
2018) and simulated annealing (Han et al. 2015); and decomposition optimization methods such as the
Lagrangian decomposition algorithm (Li, Mirchandani, and Zhou 2015, Wang et al. 2020). Other details
of these studies are presented in Appendix A. Local search algorithms and global optimization heuristic
algorithms typically incorporate one or more traffic assignment processes in each iteration. For example,
in the method proposed by Sheffi and Powell (1983), equilibrium flows are assigned in each step of the

gradient update. Similarly, Yu, Ma, and Zhang (2018) formulated the dynamic user equilibrium control
problem as a Mathematical Programs with Equilibrium Constraints (MPEC) problem and solved it
using a GAMS solver in each generation of the genetic algorithm. The decomposition method proposed
by Li, Mirchandani, and Zhou (2015), Wang et al. (2020), although it does not involve multiple
instances of traffic assignment, still exhibits high computational complexity. This is because it considers
the space-time trajectories of vehicles in the network and represents multiple intersection phases as MIphases. With an increasing number of intersections, the number of MI-phases grows exponentially,
leading to the "Curse of Dimensionality" in optimization. Due to the algorithm's complexity, although
these methods provide dynamic modeling of traffic, they are challenging to achieve real-time control
and apply to large-scale networks due to long computational times.
Distributed control methods optimize signal timing and vehicle routing in local areas, with a short
optimization time, making them suitable for real-time control. Hawas (2000) developed an integrated
real-time traffic assignment and signal control system. In this system, a group of local controllers is
distributed throughout the network and cooperates to adjust traffic assignment and signal settings based
on real-time traffic conditions. Le et al. (2017) proposed a utility-based optimization framework for
distributed traffic control, employing the BackPressure principle to solve optimal turning fractions and
signal plans. However, the vehicle routing in these methods is relies on local information, making it
difficult to obtain a network-wide optimal routing scheme.
2.2. RL Applications in Signal Control and Vehicle Routing Problem
Traffic signal control and vehicle routing involve a series of decision-making processes that strive to
accomplish a cumulative objective within a specified timeframe. To effectively tackle these sequential

decision-making problems, reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a highly suitable technique
(Qin et al. 2019), capable of considering both long-term and short-term performance. Consequently, RL
has witnessed a growing number of applications in traffic control and vehicle routing.
Over the past few years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have been extensively
employed in the studies of signal optimization. Liang et al. (2019) employed the DRL algorithm to
control the traffic light cycle. To overcome the challenge of high dimensionality associated with large
state and action spaces, J. Lee, Chung, and Sohn (2020) proposed a reinforcement learning algorithm
that identifies the entire traffic state and simultaneously governs all traffic signals within the network.
Given that networks with distributed signal controllers can be seen as multi-agent systems, several
researchers have employed the MADRL algorithm to control signal timings at multiple intersections
within these networks(Abdoos and Bazzan 2021). To tackle the multi-intersection signal control
problem, S. Yang et al. (2021b) proposed a decentralized MADRL algorithm that employs an inductive
heterogeneous graph neural network. Zhang et al. (2021) presented a cooperative multi-agent actorcritic DRL approach that utilizes an edge computing architecture. Their approach incorporates a
cooperative mechanism that considers the contribution weight distributions of local agents to achieve
global optimization in the context of traffic control. Abdoos and Bazzan (2021) developed a hierarchical
multi-agent system to deal with large traffic signal control. This system comprises agents at different
levels, with first-level agents leveraging reinforcement learning to identify the optimal policy and
second-level agents employing a long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network to estimate the traffic
state.
Numerous researchers have utilized RL to address vehicle routing problems(Mellouk, Hoceini, and

Amirat 2007). In their recent study, Lazar et al. (2021) devised a routing strategy for autonomous
vehicles (AVs) in mixed-autonomy traffic. Their approach involved employing a planner to govern the
AVs and using DRL to learn the optimal policy. Others adopted a multi-agent structure, with each driver
represented as an agent, to model the vehicle routing problem(Ramos, Bazzan, and da Silva 2018,
Grunitzki, Ramos, and Ieee 2020). Ramos, Bazzan, and da Silva (2018) proposed a regret-minimizing
method to tackle vehicle routing problem. In multi-agent RL, agents learn using regret as a
reinforcement signal, which is calculated based on the agents' observed information and global
information from the navigation app. Assuming that road users(agents) choose routes independently,
Grunitzki, Ramos, and Ieee (2020) employed multi-agent RL to address traffic assignment problem,
and designed three reward functions including expert-designed rewards, difference rewards and
intrinsically motivated rewards.
While RL has gained popularity for optimizing signal control and vehicle routing with a
consideration of both short-term and long-term impacts, the joint control problem using RL has received
limited attention. Zhu et al. (2021) addressed this problem by jointly optimizing traffic signals and
rerouting for connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs) at a bottleneck intersection, but their approach
did not utilize a multi-agent structure, potentially limiting scalability. Sun et al. (2023) developed a bidirectional hierarchical RL framework for coordinating traffic signal phases and AVs’ turning directions.
However, their focus on single intersection vehicle navigation could be improved by considering
possible routes for the OD flows. They also mainly considered local traffic conditions around signals,
in contrast to the real-world scenario where drivers choose routes based on path cost, including
conditions on subsequent links.

2.3. Literature Summary and Paper’s Contribution
The integration of signal control and vehicle routing has been supported by theoretical studies as a
superior approach compared to relying solely on signal control. This integration can be approached
through centralized control and distributed control methods. Existing centralized control methods aim
to optimize network performance by optimizing signal timings and flow distribution from a networkwide perspective. However, these methods often face challenges such as high algorithm complexity,
computational inefficiency, convergence to suboptimal solutions, and limited applicability to real-time
control, especially for large-scale networks. On the other hand, distributed control methods focus on
optimizing signal timing and vehicle routing in local areas, allowing for faster optimization and making
them suitable for real-time control. However, distributed control relies on local information for vehicle
routing, which makes it difficult to achieve a network-wide optimal routing scheme. The main challenge
lies in effectively optimizing real-time control strategies that consider both the long-term and longdistance effects of route choice. This challenge arises due to the differing impacts of vehicle routing,
which has a long-term and long-distance influence, and signal control, which primarily affects the shortterm and local conditions. In summary, the integration of signal control and vehicle routing is a
promising approach, but it requires tackling the difficulties of algorithm complexity, computational
efficiency, and achieving network-wide optimization while considering both short-term and long-term
effects of the control measures.
RL has become a popular approach for developing signal control and vehicle routing, as it
optimizes a real-time control policy while considering both the short-term and long-term impacts of the
policy. Despite this, there have been few studies using RL to tackle the joint control problem, and the

absence of a multi-agent structure constrains the scalability of the solvable network. Furthermore,
existing multi-agent RL methods for vehicle routing primarily consider individual vehicles as units,
which may not be well-suited for integration with signal control agents.
The contribution of this paper is summarized as: 1) to the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that employs MADRL to find the optimal joint policy of signal control and vehicle routing; 2) a
novel vehicle routing agent is designed to effectively address the multi-origin-destination routing
problem, and it can be integrated into the same dimension as the signal control agents; 3) the interaction
and cooperation among multiple agents are designed and corresponding DNN structures are constructed
to facilitate convergence of the MADRL algorithm; 4) the performance of the control strategy under
different compliance rates is discussed.
3 System architecture and controller design
3.1. System Architecture
The proposed method of joint optimization aims to improve the traffic efficiency in the road network
by simultaneously controlling signal timings and vehicles’ routes. The joint control problem can be
formulated as a multi-agent structure, where Signal Control Agents (SAs) are responsible for adjusting
signal timings at intersections, while Vehicle Routing Agents (RAs) determine the routes for the
vehicles.
As shown in Fig.2, SAs are distributed in the network and each agent controls signal plan of each
signalized intersection. At the same time, each RA is situated at the upstream edge of the fork point of
the feasible routes within an Origin-Destination (OD) pair. It aims to help vehicles choose subsequent
routes of vehicles for this OD pair on this edge. For instance, OD pair (O1, D1 exists three feasible

routes, i.e., Route1, Route2, Route3, with two RAs positioned at the edge (O1, I1) and edge (I1, I2),
where RA1 determines to choose Routes from 1,2, or 3; and RA2 decides to choose Routes from 1 or
2. The number of RAs depends on the number of feasible routes of OD pairs. In real-world scenarios,
it will not be overly abundant, as several routs with high travel costs may be discarded in advance.
D2

I1
O1

I3

I2

SA1 Route1

SA2

SA3

Route2
RA2

RA1

Route3

Route4

Route5

I5

I6

I4
SA4

SA5

SA6

RA3

D1

Signal control agent
Route choice agent

O2

Figure 2 Example network
In MADRL, agents interact with the environment through a series of discrete control steps. The
decision-making process of an agent can be described as a Markov decision process (MDP). At each
control step 𝑡 , given a state 𝑠 , the agent takes an action 𝑎 according to its policy 𝜋 . Then the
environment returns a reward and subsequently updates the state. In DRL, the agent searches for the
optimal policy within a continuous time series, whereby the optimal policy typically corresponds to the
maximum cumulative reward over the long term.
Fig.3 shows the implementation architecture of the joint optimization method based on MAA2C

DRL approach. A decentralized training and execution approach is employed, whereby each agent has
its own policy network and value network. This means that each agent to learn its own decision-making
policy and value function independently, based on its own observations (referred to as local state) and
rewards. As the actions of each agent can impact the next state of the environment, it can subsequently
affect the behaviors of other agents within the system. To promote coordination among the agents,
shared observations and rewards are utilized, enabling agents to exchange information and synchronize
their behaviors. Additional details regarding this approach will be provided in Section 4.1.

Data Set

Critic_RA1
SA1

State_RA1

Actor_RA1

State_RA2

Actor_RA2

State_SA1

Actor_SA1

SA4

State_SA4

Actor_SA4

Environment

State

RA1

RA2

Action_RA1

RA1

SA1

RA2

Reward_RA1

Critic_RA2
Action_RA2

Reward_RA2

Action_SA1

Reward_SA1

Critic_SA1

Critic_SA4

Value network
Policy network

Action_SA4

SA4

Reward_SA4

Action

Environment

Reward

Figure 3 The implementation architecture of joint control
3.2. Signal Control Agent
SA optimizes the signal timings of an intersection, thereby reducing vehicle delay. The local state, action
and reward definitions for SA are defined as follows.

3.2.1 State representation
We consider the state of SA as a collection of indices for each lane approaching intersection. This
collection is composed of the number of waiting vehicles, number of approaching vehicles, and the total
waiting time. Specifically, the local state of SA is defined as

local
wave wait
𝑠𝑖,𝑡
= [𝑠𝑖,𝑡
, 𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ], ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆

(1.)

local
wave
Where 𝐶𝑆 is the set of SAs, 𝑠𝑖,𝑡
is the local state for agent 𝑖 at control step 𝑡 . 𝑠𝑖,𝑡
=
wave
wait
wait
wave
[𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
]𝑙∈𝐿𝑖 , 𝑠𝑖,𝑡
= [𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
]𝑙∈𝐿𝑖 . 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
is the number of waiting and approaching vehicles of
wait
approach lane 𝑙 for agent 𝑖 at control step 𝑡 , 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
represents the cumulative waiting time of all

vehicles in approach lane 𝑙 for agent 𝑖 within control step 𝑡 , excluding waiting times that occur
outside this control step. 𝐿𝑖 denotes the set of the approach lanes of intersection 𝑖.

3.2.2 Action definition
During each control step, we select one phase from the feasible phases to be activated as the action.
𝑝

𝑝

𝑎𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 , 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑖 , ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆

(2.)
𝑝

Where 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑖 is the set of feasible phases for intersection 𝑖; 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 is the selected phase of SA 𝑖 at
control step 𝑡 . 𝑃ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑖 are predetermined according to the layout of the intersection, and do not
𝑝

𝑝

include transitional phases such as yellow. This is because if the chosen phase 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 is identical to 𝑎𝑖,𝑡−1 ,
namely the activated phase at last control step 𝑡-1, the chosen phase should be executed immediately.
𝑝

𝑝

Otherwise, the transition phase between 𝑎𝑖,𝑡−1 and 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 is executed. For example, if the signal for
approach lane 𝑙 changes from green to red, then the transition phase of yellow is executed for that
approach lane; Similarly, if the signal for approach lane 𝑙 changes from red to green, then transition
phase of red will be executed.

3.2.3 Reward definition
To optimize signal control effectively, it is crucial to use a reward that is spatially decomposable and
frequently measurable, which enables targeted analysis and adjustments to address congested lanes and
allows for real-time adaptations to changing traffic conditions. Hence, we define the reward of SA as
the total waiting time during the control step and the waiting time of the first vehicle since it stops. The

second term is included to prevent a situation where a certain phase is not executed for a prolonged
period.
local
wait
fwait
𝑟𝑖,𝑡
= − ∑𝑙∈𝐿𝑖ሺ𝑟𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
+ 𝛼1 𝑟𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
ሻ, ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆

(3.)

wait
Where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
is the total waiting time of vehicles in the approach lane 𝑙 for agent 𝑖 during control
fwait
step 𝑡; 𝑟𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
represents the waiting time of the first vehicle in the queue since it stops. The coefficient
fwait
𝛼1 is used to adjust the impact of the reward 𝑟𝑖,𝑡,𝑙
on the overall reward calculation.

3.3. Vehicle Routing Agent
RA is located at the upstream road of the nodes where the target vehicles need to make a route choice
and controls the subsequent routes of these vehicles. Fig.4 illustrate the related parameters and
definitions for RA2 in the example network. The local state, action and reward of RAs are defined as
follows.

SA1
O1

I1

SA2 I2
RA2

RA1

𝛿0

Route 1
𝜎0

Route 2 𝜎 0

SA3 I3
𝛿1

𝜎1
I5

I4
𝛿
SA4

1

SA5

I6
𝜎

1

𝛿

2

𝜎2

D1

SA6

RA3
Relevant SA of RA2

Other SA

𝜎 𝑑 : Coefficient between RA2 and downstream edge

Relevant RA of RA2

Other RA

𝛿 𝑑 : Coefficient between RA2 and relevant SA

RA2/Upstream edge

Downstream edge

Figure 4 Related parameters and definitions for RA2 in the example network

3.3.1. State representation
To make an appropriate route decision, we need to consider both the number of vehicles that require a

route decision and the traffic conditions of the potential routes. As shown in Fig.4, the upstream edge
leads to the path fork point, while the downstream edge is located on the route after the path fork point.
The local state is defined as
local
arrival down
𝑠𝑖,𝑡
= [𝑠𝑖,𝑡
, 𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ], ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅

(4.)

arrival
arrival
down
down
Where 𝐶𝑅 is the set of RAs, 𝑠𝑖,𝑡
= [𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒
]𝑒∈𝑈𝑖 , 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒
= [𝛼𝑒 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒
]𝑒∈𝐷𝑖 . 𝑈𝑖 denotes the
arrival
upstream edge of RA 𝑖, and 𝐷𝑖 denotes the downstream edges of RA 𝑖. 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒
is the number of
down
agent 𝑖’s vehicles on the upstream edge 𝑒, which need to decide following routes; 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒
is the total

number of vehicles on the downstream edge 𝑒; 𝛼𝑖,𝑒 is the coefficient of downstream edge 𝑒, which is
determined based on the location of the edge. Usually, the coefficient is smaller for edges that are farther
away from the path fork point, indicating that their impact on the overall reward calculation is reduced
in comparison to nearby edges. Specifically, we set 𝛼𝑖,𝑒 : 𝛼𝑖,𝑒 = 𝜎 𝑑𝑖,𝑒 , 𝜎 is a parameter between 0 and
1, 𝑑𝑖,𝑒 denotes the distance between agent 𝑖 and downstream edge 𝑒. As an example in Fig.4,
𝛼RA2,ሺI2,I3ሻ = 𝜎 0 , 𝛼RA2,ሺI2,I5ሻ = 𝜎 0 , 𝛼RA2,ሺI3,I6ሻ = 𝜎 1 , 𝛼RA2,ሺI5,I6ሻ = 𝜎 1 , 𝛼RA2,ሺI6,D1ሻ = 𝜎 2 .

3.3.2. Action definition
At control step 𝑡, RA 𝑖 selects a route for vehicles positioned upstream of the route divergence points
corresponding to the OD pair. RA 𝑖 's action space consists of the available route options for these
vehicles. In the specific example network, RA 2 has two route options: Route1 and Route2. This means
RA 2 can choose between Route1 and Route2 for vehicles positioned upstream of divergence points at
control step 𝑡.
Due to the edge capacity, the number of these vehicles during one control step is usually not large,
and some of them may still be on the edge after this control step, which will follow the next action at
the subsequent control step. Therefore, it is reasonable to choose the same route for vehicles during one

control step.
𝑟
𝑟
𝑎𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑎𝑖,𝑡
, 𝑎𝑖,𝑡
∈ 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑖 , ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅

(5.)

𝑟
Where 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑖 is the set of feasible routes of RA 𝑖; 𝑎𝑖,𝑡
is the selected route of RA 𝑖 at control step

𝑡.

3.3.3. Reward definition
The control objective of RA is to improve trip completion flow. Hence, the local reward is defined as
local
arrived
𝑟𝑖,𝑡
= 𝛼2 𝑟𝑖,𝑡
, ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅

(6.)

arrived
Where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡
is the number of arrived vehicles of the origin and destination corresponding to RA 𝑖
arrived
during control step 𝑡. The coefficient 𝛼2 is used to adjust the impact of the reward 𝑟𝑖,𝑡
on the

overall reward calculation.
4. MAA2C DRL Algorithm for Joint Signal Control and Route Guidance
The MAA2C DRL algorithm is employed to address the proposed joint optimization problem, making
use of deep neural networks (DNNs) for approximating both policy and value functions.

The MAA2C

algorithm is well-suited for scenarios involving multiple agents, where agents interact, cooperate, or
compete. It facilitates distributed decision-making and rewards sharing among agents, offering
interpretability and parallelism to accelerate learning. Furthermore, MAA2C adapts well to changing
state spaces and uncertainties, making it particularly suited for complex, dynamic environments such
as multi-robot systems, multi-agent games, or collaborative tasks like traffic management.
This section outlines the interaction among multiple agents in the proposed system architecture,
the MAA2C algorithm, and the DNN configuration.
4.1. Interaction Between Multiple Agents
The proposed method considers the interaction among multiple agents. We define relevant agents to

distinguish the degree of correlation among agents in the network. These relevant agents share
observations and rewards, facilitating their individual training process.
The relevant RAs for an RA are the agents associated with the same OD pairs, and the relevant SAs for
an SA are the agents located at its adjacent intersections. Notably, the relevant SAs for an RA are situated
at intersections along the potential routes, while the relevant RAs for an SA are agents whose potential
routes pass through its intersection. The relationship between SAs and RAs is mutual, meaning if an
RA is associated with an SA, then the SA is also associated with the RA. Table 1 demonstrates the
relevant agents of RAs and SAs in the example network as shown in Fig. 4.
Table 1 The definition of relevant agents
Agent

Relevant SA

Relevant RA
Agents whose potential routes

SA

Agents at its adjacent intersection
pass through its intersection

SA1

SA2, SA4

RA1

SA2

SA1, SA3, SA5

RA1, RA2, RA3

…

…

…

Agents at intersections along the
RA

Agents of the same OD pairs
potential routes

RA1

SA1, SA2, SA3, SA4, SA5, SA6

RA2

RA2

SA2, SA3, SA5, SA6

RA1

RA3

SA2, SA3, SA5, SA6

-

To enhance the connections between an agent and its relevant agents, we incorporate the shared

state and fingerprint of the relevant agents as a part of the agent’s own state. The fingerprints denote the
relevant agents’ policy at the previous control step. Given that the proposed control strategy is real-time
and the duration of control step is relatively small, the current step policy is similar to that of last step
(Chu et al. 2020). The state of SA and RA can be represented as
local
wave
arrival
𝑠𝑖,𝑡 = [𝑠𝑖,𝑡
] ∪ [𝑠𝑗,𝑡
]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑆𝑆 ∪ [𝑠𝑗,𝑡
]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑆𝑅 ∪ [𝜋𝑗,𝑡−1 ]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑆𝑆∪𝐶 𝑆𝑅 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆

(7.)

local
arrival
wave
𝑠𝑖,𝑡 = [𝑠𝑖,𝑡
] ∪ [𝑠𝑗,𝑡
]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑅𝑅 ∪ [𝑠𝑗,𝑡
]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑅𝑆 ∪ [𝜋𝑗,𝑡−1 ]𝑗∈𝐶 𝑅𝑅∪𝐶 𝑅𝑆 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅

(8.)

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

Where 𝐶𝑖𝑆𝑆 is the set of relevant SAs of SA 𝑖, 𝐶𝑖𝑆𝑅 is the set of relevant RAs of SA 𝑖, 𝐶𝑖𝑅𝑅 is the set
wait
down
of relevant RAs of RA 𝑖 , 𝐶𝑖𝑅𝑆 is the set of relevant SAs of RA 𝑖 . Since 𝑠𝑗,𝑡
and 𝑠𝑗,𝑡
of the

relevant agent 𝑗 are not as strongly associated with agent 𝑖 as

wave
arrival
𝑠𝑗,𝑡
and 𝑠𝑗,𝑡
, they are not

considered in this situation.
Also, we take relevant agents’ reward into consideration. The reward of SA and RA are calculated
as follows,
𝑆𝑅 local
local
local
𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑟𝑖,𝑡
+ 𝛽 𝑆𝑆 ∑𝑗∈𝐶 𝑆𝑆 𝑟𝑗,𝑡
+ ∑𝑗∈𝐶 𝑆𝑅 𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
𝑟𝑗,𝑡 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆
𝑖

𝑖

𝑅𝑆 local
local
𝑟𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑟𝑖,𝑡
+ ∑𝑗∈𝐶 𝑅𝑆 𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
𝑟𝑗,𝑡 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅
𝑖

(9.)
(10.)

By definition, the local reward of RA 𝑖 equals to that of its relevant RA 𝑗, therefore, this term is not
𝑆𝑅
reiterated in Eq. (10). 𝛽 𝑆𝑆 is the discount parameters of relevant SA of SA; 𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
is the discount
𝑅𝑆
parameters of relevant RA 𝑗 of SA 𝑖; 𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
is the discount parameters of relevant SA 𝑗 of RA 𝑖.

Typically, the discount parameter is smaller for SA that are farther away from the RA. To be
specific,
RS
𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
= 𝛽 RS 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑅 , 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶𝑖𝑅𝑆

(11.)

SR
𝛽ሺ𝑖,𝑗ሻ
= 𝛽 SR 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 , ∀ 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 , 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶𝑖𝑆𝑅

(12.)

where 𝛽 RS , 𝛽 SR are parameters between 0 and 1, and 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 is the coefficient between agent 𝑖 and
agent 𝑗, which is determined based on the distance between these agents. Specifically, 𝛼𝑖,𝑗 = 𝛿 𝑑𝑖,𝑗 , 𝛿
is a parameter between 0 and 1, 𝑑𝑖,𝑗 indicates the distance between agent 𝑖 and agent 𝑗. For example,
in Fig2, 𝛼RA2,SA2= 𝛿 0 , 𝛼RA2,SA3= 𝛿 1 , 𝛼RA2,SA5= 𝛿 1 , 𝛼RA2,SA6= 𝛿 2 and 𝛼SA2,RA2= 𝛿 0 , 𝛼SA3,RA2= 𝛿1 ,
𝛼SA5,RA2= 𝛿1 , 𝛼SA6,RA2= 𝛿 2.
4.2. MAA2C DRL Algorithm for Joint Control

4.2.1. MAA2C algorithm
The MAA2C algorithm is a variant of the Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) algorithm to handle multiagent environments, where multiple agents coexist and interact with each other.
Each agent has its own decision-making policy 𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ) and value function 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ. The
Temporal Difference (TD) target of agent 𝑖 at control step 𝑡 can be calculated as
𝑡 −1

𝐵
𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = ∑𝜏=𝑡
𝛾 𝜏−𝑡 𝑟𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑡𝐵 −𝑡 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡𝐵 ሻ

(13.)

Where 𝐵 is the transition batch, 𝐵 = {𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1 }, 𝑡𝐵 is the final control steps of the transition
batch 𝐵; 𝛾 is the discount factor, a value between 0 and 1. It determines the importance of future
rewards in reinforcement learning. By balancing short-term gains and long-term rewards, the discount
factor allows the agent to make optimal decisions over time.
Algorithm Multi-agent advantage actor critic algorithm
Input:
Initialize policy parameters 𝜃𝑖 , value-function parameters 𝜔𝑖 , empty transition
buffer 𝐷
Initialize environment state, fingerprints, 𝑡 ← 1

While True:
For 𝑛 steps:
For 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅
Select action 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 according to policy 𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )
Get value 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ according to value function 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ
Execute 𝑎𝑡 in the environment
Get next state 𝑠𝑡+1 , reward 𝑟𝑡
Store ሺ𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻሻ in the transitions batch 𝐵
Update state 𝑠𝑡 ← 𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑡 ← 𝑡 + 1
For 𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 :
Given 𝐵 = {𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ}
Compute 𝑅𝑡 , 𝐴𝑡
Update policy by one step of gradient descent using
𝜃𝑖 ← 𝜃𝑖 + 𝜏𝜃 ∇𝜃𝑖 𝐽ሺ𝜃𝑖 ሻ
Update V-functions by one step of gradient descent using
𝜔𝑖 ← 𝜔𝑖 − 𝜏𝜔 ∇𝜔𝑖 𝐿ሺ𝜔𝑖 ሻ
Empty the transitions batch 𝐵
If the simulation step size reaches the last step:
Reset environment state, fingerprints, 𝑡 ← 1
If stopping condition reached:
Return policy parameters 𝜃𝑖 , value-function parameters 𝜔𝑖

The advantage function 𝐴𝑖,𝑡 can be calculated by
𝐴𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ

(14.)

The value loss is as follows:
1

𝐿ሺ𝜔𝑖 ሻ = 2𝑛 ∑𝑡∈𝑇𝐵 ሺ𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻሻ2

(15.)

Where 𝑛 is the number of steps in a batch; 𝑇𝐵 is the set of the control steps in the transition batch.
The policy gradient is as follows,
1

𝛻𝜃𝑖 𝐽ሺ𝜃𝑖 ሻ = 𝛻𝜃𝑖 𝑛 ∑𝑡∈𝑇𝐵 (𝑙𝑜𝑔𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )𝐴𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽en 𝐻 (𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )))

(16.)

The entropy of the policy 𝜋𝜃𝑖 is incorporated into the function of improved exploration to discourage
premature convergence to suboptimal deterministic policies. This regularization term encourages a
distribution with a "flat entropy" shape, which makes it less likely to converge on a single action during
training(Williams and Peng 1991). By adding this entropy term to the objective function, the exploration
of different actions is promoted, preventing the policy from getting stuck in local optima and promoting
a more diverse exploration of the action space. 𝐻 (𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )) is the entropy, 𝐻 (𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )) =
− ∑𝑎𝑖,𝑡 ∈𝑉𝑖,𝑡 𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑠𝑖,𝑡 )𝑙𝑜𝑔𝜋𝜃𝑖 (𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ) , 𝑉𝑖,𝑡 is the set of 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 , hyperparameter 𝛽en controls the
strength of the entropy regularization term.
The MAA2C algorithm is shown as follows, where

𝑠𝑡 = {𝑠𝑖,𝑡 |𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 } ,

𝑎𝑡 =

{𝑎𝑖,𝑡 |𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 } , 𝑟𝑡 = {𝑟𝑖,𝑡 |𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 } , 𝑅𝑡 = {𝑅𝑖,𝑡 |𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 } , 𝐴𝑡 = {𝐴𝑖,𝑡 |𝑖 ∈ 𝐶𝑆 ∪ 𝐶𝑅 } . Each
batch has n steps. At each step, the policy and value networks are used to obtain the action 𝑎𝑖,𝑡 and the
value function 𝑉𝜔𝑖 ሺ𝑠𝑖,𝑡 ሻ for each agent 𝑖. These actions are then executed in the environment, resulting
in a new state 𝑠𝑡+1 and reward 𝑟𝑡 . The transition for each step is stored in a transition batch. After
collecting a batch of data, the TD target and advantage for each agent can be calculated, and the policy

and value networks can be updated accordingly. If the simulation step size reaches the last step, the
environment is reset, and the training continues with a new episode. The algorithm continues to collect
data and update the networks until a stopping condition is met, such as reaching a maximum number of
training steps or achieving a certain level of performance. Once the stopping condition is met, the policy
parameters 𝜃𝑖 , value-function parameters 𝜔𝑖 are returned.

4.2.2. DNN configuration
In this multi-agent algorithm, each agent has its own policy network and value network. The adopted
DNNs consists of fully connected (FC) layers, long-short term memory (LSTM) layer (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) and policy /value FC layers. The policy and value DNN are trained separately,
instead of sharing lower layers between them. Fig.5 presents the DNN structure of SA.
To avoid the confusion of state input, each type of state is processed by an independent FC
layer(Chu et al. 2020). For SA, the states include wave states of itself and relevant SAs, wait states of
itself, arrival states of relevant route agents and policy of relevant agents. For RA, the states include
arrival states of itself and relevant RAs, downstream state if itself, wave states of relevant SAs and
policy of relevant agents. The corresponding FC layers are constructed for these four type states.
Then all hidden data is merged and input into a LSTM layer. As for signal control and vehicle route
problem, since network traffic flow is complex spatial-temporal data, the collected data of current states
cannot reflect the complete traffic characteristics required for control strategy. Taking LSTM as a hidden
layer can tackle this problem since it utilizes the features of time series within a longer time window. In
LSTM network, previous cell states are conveyed, and each LSTM cell includes input gate, forget gate
and output gate, which enable LSTMs to cope with sequential data with long-term dependencies.

For policy DNN, the output layer is a FC layer with the number of neurons in the FC layer
matching the size of the action space. A softmax function is adopted to generate the policy, with each
output neuron representing the probability of a specific action. For value DNN, the output is in the
form of a single value, which represents the estimated value of the corresponding state.

FC layer

FC 1

LSTM layer

FC layer

𝐰𝐚𝐯𝐞
𝒔𝐰𝐚𝐯𝐞
𝒊,𝒕 , [𝒔𝒋,𝒕 ]𝒋∈𝑪𝑺𝑺
𝒊

Softmax
function
FC 2

𝝅𝜽𝒊 (𝒂𝒊,𝒕 |𝒔𝒊,𝒕 )

𝒔𝐰𝐚𝐢𝐭
𝒊,𝒕
FC 3

or

[𝒔𝐚𝐫𝐫𝐢𝐯𝐚𝐥
]𝒋∈𝑪𝑺𝑹
𝒋,𝒕
𝒊

𝑽𝝎𝒊 ሺ𝒔𝒊,𝒕 ሻ

FC 4
[𝝅𝒋,𝒕−𝟏 ]𝒋∈𝑪𝑺𝑺 ∪𝑪𝑺𝑹
𝒊

𝒊

Figure 5 Policy/value DNN structure of SA
A gradient-based stochastic optimization method called adaptive moment estimation algorithm
(Adam) (Kingma and Ba 2014) is adopted for DNN training. Adam is a prevailing optimizer for deep
learning, which combines the advantages of AdaGrad(Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011) and RMSProp.
5. Numerical Experiments
5.1. Parameter Settings

5.1.1. Environment settings
SUMO-simulated traffic environment is adopted to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
We test the proposed joint control method in a modified Sioux Falls network. The simulated traffic

environment for each episode lasts 3600 seconds, with the control step length and the duration of the
transition phase set to 5 seconds.
Fig. 6 shows the layout of the network, which includes 17 signalized intersections，7 intersections
under priority control and 7 external intersections that serve as origin and destination nodes for traffic
demand.
1'

1

2

2'

5'

3'

3

4

12

11

5

6

9

8

7

10

16

18

7'

17

23'

13'

13

14

15

23

22

24

21

Origin and
desitination

priority
control
intersection

19

20

signal
control
intersection

Figure 6 The modified Sioux Falls network
The edges in the road network are bidirectional with two lanes in each direction. As shown in Fig.6,
there are three types of signalized intersections, respectively with three, four, five inbound roads. The
layout and potential signal phases of these intersections are presented in Table B.1.
Time-varying traffic flows are applied to train the control policy and improve its efficiency under
varying traffic conditions. Four types of flow distribution are designed and presented in Figure B.1.
Flow ratio represents the proportion between the current flow and the peak flow. The OD pairs and their
potential routes, peak flow and the type of flow fluctuations and corresponding RAs are shown in Table

B.2. In summary, the simulation environment consists of 17 SAs and 12 RAs.

5.1.2. Parameters of the MAA2C algorithm
In each episode, there are 720 control steps. The training is terminated after 500000 control steps, which
is approximately 695 episodes. Other parameters necessary to implement the proposed MADRL
algorithm are listed in Table B.3.
Within the framework of DRL, different indicators (such as different types of states, reward) may
show different dimensions and unit, thereby impeding the accuracy of training outcomes. To counteract
this, normalization techniques are employed to remove the influence of dimensionality and to facilitate
comparability among such indicators. In particular, the normalized states and rewards are clipped within
specific ranges. Normalization factors for each indicator are determined based on default values
obtained from a sample simulation.
The TensorFlow function 'tf.train.AdamOptimizer' is utilized with several parameters to regulate
and fine-tune the optimization process. The learning rate determines the magnitude of parameter
updates during training iterations. The exponential decay rates for the first and second moment estimates
control the influence of past gradients on the current update. A small constant, epsilon, is added to the
denominator of the update rule to prevent division by zero. Also, we employ the gradient clipping to
control the norm of gradients and mitigate the issue of exploding gradients. When the gradient norm
surpasses a predefined threshold, the gradients are rescaled to keep them within the designated limit.
This technique serves to stabilize the training process and prevent drastic parameter updates caused by
excessively large gradients.
5.2. Training and Evaluation Results
Fig.8 illustrates the training curve for joint control, depicting the cumulative sum of local rewards per

training episode across all agents, which can be expressed as follows:
local
𝑅 = ∑𝑡∈𝑇 ∑ 𝑖∈𝐶𝐴 𝑟𝑖,𝑡

(17.)

Where 𝑇 is the set of control steps per episode. The total training curve initially increases and then
converges as MADRL algorithm learn from accumulated experience, ultimately reaching an optimal
policy.
Fig.9 displays the cumulative local reward per episode for each signal control agent and vehicle
routing agent. Initially, there are substantial fluctuations in the cumulative reward as the training
progresses. However, these fluctuations gradually diminish over time, leading to a more stable reward
trend. Notably, the rewards of most agents show considerable improvements throughout the training
process.

Figure 8 Training curves for joint control

(a) Signal control agent

(b) Vehicle routing agent

Figure 9 Training curves for each agent

To provide a comprehensive understanding of the impact of joint optimization of signal control
and vehicle routing, we also explore two control scenarios for comparison. The first scenario involves
signal control without controlling the vehicles' routes, while the second scenario involves route
guidance with fixed signal control. These scenarios are considered to further analyze and contrast the
effects of different control strategies. Fig.10 illustrates the curves depicting the total number of arrived
vehicles and the average vehicle delay during the training process for each scenario.

(a) Total number of arrived vehicles

(b) Average vehicle delay

Figure 10 Training curves for three scenarios
According to Fig.10, the training curves for signal control and joint control show similar
performance, with both converging within a few episodes. However, joint control surpasses signal
control by establishing an enhanced control policy for both route and signal timings. This improvement
leads to notable enhancements in network performance, including a higher number of arrived vehicles
and a reduced average vehicle delay. On the other hand, the initial performance of the vehicle routing
control is relatively high, owing to the initial random exploration and optimistic parameter settings that
prompt the agents to take actions with higher rewards. However, as the training progresses, the agents
fail to improve their strategies.
The optimized policy was implemented in the environment, running for 10 episodes to collect

evaluation results for further analysis of the effectiveness of joint control. The evaluation metrics
include the total number of arrived vehicles, average delay, average speed, and average queue per
intersection approach. As shown in Table 2, it is evident that the joint control surpasses the individual
approaches of signal control or vehicle routing, demonstrating superior performance.
Table 2 Evaluation results for three scenarios
Total arrived

Average

Average

Average

number (veh)

delay (s)

speed (m/s)

queue (veh)

Joint control

3646

60.3

11.2

0.26

Signal control

3412

67.7

10.5

0.43

Vehicle routing

3157

86.6

8.6

0.73

5.3. Different Compliance

Figure 11 network performance under different vehicle compliance rates
We conducted an analysis of the optimized joint control policy's performance under varying vehicle
compliance conditions. In our evaluation environment, we modeled traffic flows with two types of
vehicles: those that comply with the system instructions and others that do not. The compliant vehicles
follow the routes optimized by the control policy, while the non-compliant vehicles choose the predefined route. Fig.11 illustrates the network's performance under different compliance rates. The results

suggest that higher compliance levels have a positive impact on the control effectiveness of the joint
control policy. Specifically, the strategy performs well when the vehicle compliance rate exceeds 70%.
The above conclusion differs from that of many other methods. For example, in the study by Le et
al. (2017), their proposed control strategy achieved optimal performance at a compliance rate of 30%.
This was because their route guidance approach aims to divert traffic away from congested areas,
thereby improving the overall travel time in the network. However, when too many vehicles follow the
route guidance advice (more than 30%), the benefits of reduced congestion are outweighed by the
increased travel time on longer paths, resulting in a decrease in overall network performance. This
drawback highlights the limitations of distributed control, where route guidance advice is solely based
on local information.
In our proposed method, vehicle routing relies on network-wide information, thus avoiding such
limitations. Therefore, in our study, higher compliance with the optimized routes leads to better
outcomes compared to lower compliance levels. This finding provides further evidence supporting the
superiority of our control policy solution.
5.4. Different Traffic Condition

Figure 12 Performance under different traffic condition
Fig.12 illustrates the performance of the optimized control policy under varying traffic conditions. The

x-axis represents the multiplicative factor of the current traffic volume, the bars represent the total
number of arrived vehicles, and the line represents the completion rate, which is calculated by dividing
the number of arrived vehicles by the number of departed vehicles.
When the multiplicative factor is below 1.25, the throughputs of the situations increase as the traffic
demand increases. However, when the multiplicative factor exceeds 1.25, this trend reverses, and a
decrease in throughputs is observed. Additionally, the completion rate reaches its highest level when
the multiplicative factor is below 0.8. This indicates that at these levels, the traffic volume is
undersaturated, and all demands can be promptly met.
6. Conclusion
The joint optimization approach proposed in this paper, which combines traffic signal control and
vehicle routing, has shown promising results in improving network performance and reducing traffic
congestion. By employing MAA2C algorithm, the approach enables signal control agents to optimize
signal timings and vehicle routing agents to optimize route choice. Through defining relevance among
agents and enabling them to share observations and rewards, the proposed method promotes interaction
and cooperation among agents. Additionally, the DNN structure is designed to facilitate algorithm
convergence. To our knowledge, this study is the first to employ MADRL to find the optimal joint
policy of signal control and vehicle routing.
The numerical experiments conducted on the modified Sioux network have demonstrated that the
proposed joint signal control and vehicle routing surpasses the individual strategies of controlling signal
timings alone or controlling vehicles’ routes alone. This integrated approach proves to be more effective
in enhancing the total number of arrived vehicles and average speed, while simultaneously reducing

average delay and queue length. Furthermore, the study explores the performance of the optimized joint
control policy across various vehicle compliance conditions.
In conclusion, the joint optimization approach proposed in this paper has proven to be effective in
reducing delays and improving throughput in signalized road networks. The approach can also be
extended to other vehicle-road collaboration problems, such as joint variable speed limits and ramp
control, as well as joint signal control and vehicle speed control. However, it is important to
acknowledge that the approach has certain limitations. One drawback is the potential increase in
computational complexity and cost, particularly for large-scale networks, as the MADRL method
requires significant computational resources for agent training. In addition, the cooperation parameters
that may impact the performance of the approach must be accurately defined before training. Future
research can incorporate this process into training by using Graph Neural Network (GNN) to estimate
the value and policy networks as well as to illustrate the cooperation among agents. Overall, the
proposed approach demonstrates the potential of MADRL in tackling intricate traffic management
challenges and offers valuable perspectives for future studies.
References
Abdelfatah AS, Mahmassani HS, Nrc NRC (1998) System optimal time-dependent path assignment and
signal timing in traffic network. Forecasting, travel behavior, and network modeling, 185-193.
Abdoos M, Bazzan ALC (2021) Hierarchical traffic signal optimization using reinforcement learning
and traffic prediction with long-short term memory. Expert Systems with Applications 171.
Akcelik R, Maher MJ (1977) Route control of traffic in urban road networks - review and principles.
Transportation Research 11(1):15-24.

Allsop RE (1974) Some possibilities for using traffic control to influence trip distribution and route
choice. Transportation & Traffic Theory Proceedings 6.
Allsop RE, Charlesworth JA (1977) Traffic in a signal-controlled road network: An example of different
signal timings inducing different routeings. traffic engineering & control.
Charlesworth JA (1977) Mutually consistent traffic assignment and signal timings for a signalcontrolled road network. Publication of: Newcastle-Upon-Tyne University, England.
Chiou S-W (2014) Optimization of robust area traffic control with equilibrium flow under demand
uncertainty. Computers & Operations Research 41:399-411.
Chu T, Wang J, Codeca L, Li Z (2020) Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for large-scale traffic
signal control. Ieee Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21(3):1086-1095.
D'Ans GC, Gazis DC (1976) Optimal control of oversaturated store-and-forward transportation
networks. Transportation Science 10(1):1-19.
Dickson TJ (1981) A note on traffic assignment and signal timings in a signal-controlled road network.
Transportation Research Part B-Methodological 15(4):267-271.
Duchi J, Hazan E, Singer Y (2011) Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and stochastic
optimization. Journal of machine learning research 12(7).
Gartner NH (1977) Influence of control measures on traffic equilibrium in an urban highway network.
Transportation Research Record (644).
Gazis DC (1974) Modeling and optimal control of congested transportation systems (Vorträge der
Jahrestagung 1972 DGOR / Papers of the Annual Meeting 1972).
Grunitzki R, Ramos GdO, Ieee (2020) On the role of reward functions for reinforcement learning in the

traffic assignment problem. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) held as
part of the IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence (IEEE WCCI).
Han K, Sun Y, Liu H, Friesz TL, Yao T (2015) A bi-level model of dynamic traffic signal control with
continuum approximation. Transportation Research Part C-Emerging Technologies 55:409-431.
Hawas YE (2000) Integrated traffic assignment and signal control for on-line operation. Proc., 7th
World Congress on Intelligent Transportation Systems.
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural computation 9(8):1735-1780.
Kingma DP, Ba J (2014) Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Lazar DA, Biyik E, Sadigh D, Pedarsani R (2021) Learning how to dynamically route autonomous
vehicles on shared roads. Transportation Research Part C-Emerging Technologies 130.
Le T, Vu HL, Walton N, Hoogendoorn SP, Kovacs P, Queija RN (2017) Utility optimization framework
for a distributed traffic control of urban road networks. Transportation Research Part BMethodological 105:539-558.
Lee C, Machemehl RB (2005) Combined traffic signal control and traffic assignment : Algorithms,
implementation and numerical results. The University of Texas at Austin.
Lee J, Chung J, Sohn K (2020) Reinforcement learning for joint control of traffic signals in a
transportation network. Ieee Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69(2):1375-1387.
Li P, Mirchandani P, Zhou X (2015) Solving simultaneous route guidance and traffic signal optimization
problem using space-phase-time hypernetwork. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological
81:103-130.
Liang X, Du X, Wang G, Han Z (2019) A deep reinforcement learning network for traffic light cycle

control. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 68(2):1243-1253.
Marcotte P (1983) Network optimization with continuous control parameters. Transportation Science
17(2):181-197.
Mellouk A, Hoceini S, Amirat Y (2007) Adaptive quality of service-based routing approaches:
Development of neuro-dynamic state-dependent reinforcement learning algorithms. International
Journal of Communication Systems 20(10):1113-1130.
Qin Z, Tang J, Ye J, Assoc Comp M (2019) Deep reinforcement learning with applications in
transportation. 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining (KDD), 3201-3202.
Ramos GdO, Bazzan ALC, da Silva BC (2018) Analysing the impact of travel information for
minimising the regret of route choice. Transportation Research Part C-Emerging Technologies
88:257-271.
Sheffi Y, Powell WB (1983) Optimal signal settings over transportation networks. Journal of
Transportation Engineering 109(6):824-839.
Sun Q, Zhang L, Yu H, Zhang W, Mei Y, Xiong H (2023) Hierarchical reinforcement learning for
dynamic autonomous vehicle navigation at intelligent intersections. Proceedings of the 29th ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 4852-4861.
Ukkusuri S, Doan K, Aziz HMA (2013) A bi-level formulation for the combined dynamic equilibrium
based traffic signal control. 20th International Symposium on Transportation and Traffic Theory
(ISTTT), 729-752.
Varia H, Dhingra S (2004) Dynamic optimal traffic assignment and signal time optimization using

genetic algorithms. Computer‐Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 19(4):260-273.
Wang P, Li P, Chowdhury Farzana R, Zhang L, Zhou X (2020) A mixed integer programming
formulation and scalable solution algorithms for traffic control coordination across multiple
intersections based on vehicle space-time trajectories. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological 134:266-304.
Williams RJ, Peng J (1991) Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
algorithms. Connection Science 3(3):241-268.
Wong S, Yang C (1999) An iterative group‐based signal optimization scheme for traffic equilibrium
networks. Journal of Advanced Transportation 33(2):201-217.
Yang F, Vereshchaka A, Lepri B, Dong W (2021a) Optimizing city-scale traffic through modeling
observations of vehicle movements. Ieee Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems.
Yang S, Yang B, Kang Z, Deng L (2021b) Ihg-ma: Inductive heterogeneous graph multi-agent
reinforcement learning for multi-intersection traffic signal control. Neural Networks 139:265-277.
Yu H, Ma R, Zhang HM (2018) Optimal traffic signal control under dynamic user equilibrium and link
constraints in a general network. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 110:302-325.
Zhang Y, Zhou Y, Lu H, Fujita H (2021) Cooperative multi-agent actor-critic control of traffic network
flow based on edge computing. Future Generation Computer Systems-the International Journal of
Escience 123:128-141.
Zhu H, Wang Z, Yang F, Zhou Y, Luo X (2021) Intelligent traffic network control in the era of internet
of vehicles. Ieee Transactions on Vehicular Technology 70(10):9787-9802.

Appendix A
Table A.1 Details of the relevant studies
Control

Control

Study

Criterion for
Objective

mode

strategy

Travel cost
Decision variable

route

Algorithm
estimation

Signal settings
Minimize delay and

variables; link flows;

(Chiou 2014)

Bundle-type
TRANSYT

number of stops
Static

OD demand growth

gradient method

User
factors

Centralize
traffic

equilibrium
Gradient

d control
(Sheffi and

Link volume-travel
Green split

Minimize total travel
Powell 1983)

projection
time curve
algorithm

time
(Li,

Dynami

System

Phase-time arc

Space- phase-time

Lagrangian

Mirchandani,

c traffic

optimization

hyper network

and Zhou

decomposition
method

2015, Wang
et al. 2020)
(Varia and

Delay model for
Green time; flow

Dhingra

signalized
distribution

2004)

intersection
Genetic algorithm
Continuous-time

Yu, Ma, and
Green time
Zhang (2018)

double-queue

User
model
equilibrium

(Han et al.

Minimize network-

LWR-based

Simulated

dynamic network

annealing method,

Green splits
2015)

wide travel costs

model
(Hawas

Minimize total travel

Green time, guided

etc

A microscopic
On-line operation

2000)

time
Distribute

Maximize network

routes

simulation model

System
BackPressure

(Le et al.

d control

throughput and

optimization

Signal phase, turning
-

2017)

minimize spatial

mechanism’s

fractions
principle

heterogeneity

Appendix B

Figure B.1 Four types of flow distribution
Table B.1 The layout and potential signal phases of intersections in the network
Type

1

Layout

Phase pattern

f
f
f

f
f
fff

f
f
f

2

f
f
f
fff

f
f
f
f

3

ff

Table B.2 Traffic demand
Peak

Fluctuations

Index Origin Destination

Potential routes
flow

type

1

1

2

240

1

[1 2]

2

1

5

240

2

[1 3 4 5]

RA

[1 3 4 5 6 8 7],
3

1

7

360

3

RA1
[1 3 4 5 9 8 7]
[1 3 4 11 14 23],

4

1

23

360

2

RA2
[1 3 12 11 14 23]

5

2

1

120

1

[2 1]

6

2

5

120

3

[2 6 5]

7

2

7

240

4

[2 6 8 7]

8

2

13

240

1

[2 1 3 12 13]
[2 6 8 16 10 15 22 23],
RA3,

9

2

23

360

3

[2 6 5 4 11 14 23],
RA4
[2 6 8 16 10 11 14 23]

10

3

1

120

2

[3 1]
[3 4 5 6 8 7],

11

3

7

360

3

RA5
[3 4 5 9 8 7]

12

5

2

240

4

[5 6 2]
[5 9 10 15 22 23],
RA6,

13

5

23

480

1

[5 4 11 14 23],
RA7
[5 9 10 11 14 23]
[7 8 6 2 1],
RA8,

14

7

1

360

2

[7 8 6 5 4 3 1],
RA9
[7 8 9 5 4 3 1]

15

7

2

120

3

[7 8 6 2]

16

7

13

240

4

[7 18 20 21 24 13]

17

7

23

240

2

[7 18 20 22 23]
[13 24 23 14 11 4 5 6 2],

18

13

2

360

1

RA10
[13 12 3 1 2]

19

13

3

240

3

[13 12 3]

20

13

5

360

4

[13 12 3 4 5]

21

13

7

240

1

[13 24 21 20 18 7]

22

13

23

240

2

[13 24 23]
[23 14 11 4 3 1],

23

23

1

180

3

RA11
[23 14 11 12 3 1]

24

23

5

120

2

[23 14 11 4 5]
[23 22 20 18 7],

25

23

7

360

4

RA12
[23 22 15 10 9 8 7]

26

23

13

240

1

[23 24 13]

Table B.3 Hyperparameters for MADRL training
Description

Applied value

The number of steps in a batch 𝑛

144

Discount factor 𝛾

0.99

Entropy coefficient of regularization term 𝛽en for SA

0.05

Entropy coefficient of regularization term 𝛽en for RA

0.01

The threshold for the gradient norm

30

Learning rate

2.5e-4

Adam

Exponential decay rates for the first estimates

0.9

optimizer

Exponential decay rates for the second estimates

0.999

Epsilon

1e-8

Neuron number of LSTM

128

DNN setting
Neuron number of FC1

SA

140

RA

20

State clip

Reward clip

Neuron number of FC2

60

70

Neuron number of FC3

50

200

Neuron number of FC4

70

50

Clipping threshold

[0,2]

wave
the normalization factors of state 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑙

2

wait
the normalization factors of state 𝑠𝑖,𝑡.𝑙

8

arrival
the normalization factors of state 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒

16

down
the normalization factors of state 𝑠𝑖,𝑡,𝑒

7

Clipping threshold

[-6,6]

the normalization factors of SA’s reward 𝑟𝑖,𝑡

400

the normalization factors of RA’s reward 𝑟𝑖,𝑡

100

Coefficient of
𝛼1 = 1, 𝛼2 = 1000, 𝛽 𝑆𝑆 = 0.3, 𝛽 𝑆𝑅 = 0.3, 𝛽 𝑅𝑆 = 0.1, 𝛿 = 0.5, 𝜎 = 0.5
reward, state

