2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)
October 8-12, 2022, Macau, China

Vehicle-Road Collaborative Path Planning Based on
A*-assisted Deep Reinforcement Learning

2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) | 978-1-6654-6880-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ITSC55140.2022.9921845

Chenhao Jin, Yinyan Wu and Congduan Li∗
Abstract— Traffic congestion is a serious problem that needs
to be solved in the development of intelligent transportation,
and global path planning is an effective way, especially with
the collaborative optimization on various traffic participants.
In this paper, we formulate the vehicle global path planning as
a Markov decision problem, and propose an A*-assisted deep
reinforcement learning algorithm to achieve path optimization
in complex environment by maximizing the total rewards.
Compared with the existing ones in the literature, the proposed
method can not only filter and extract unobvious features
from multidimensional observations, but also make dynamic
decisions in complex environment. To verify the effectiveness
of our algorithm, we design experiments on the Simulation
of Urban MObility (SUMO) platform. It is shown that the
proposed algorithm converges faster and can deal with the
changing and complex environment more effectively, which
provides a practical solution to the problem of urban traffic
congestion.
Index Terms— global path planning, A* assisted deep reinforcement learning, dynamic decision

I. INTRODUCTION
With the development of urbanization, traffic congestion
problem is getting worse and worse, and may lead to serious
issues in economics, environment and safety. Path planning,
as one of the most effective methods to solve traffic congestions, and one of the key technologies in autonomous driving,
has always been a hot topic in academia and industry.
One challenge that the current path planning algorithms
need to solve is how to plan an efficient path in various
scenarios, especially cope with the dynamic changes of the
road conditions.
Vehicle path planning algorithms include static ones and
dynamic ones [1]. Static path planning is constrained by
global map information and traffic rules to find the optimal
path. Dynamic path planning requires consideration of realtime traffic information and adjusts the optimal pre-planned
path until reaching the destination. The traditional global
path planning algorithms include: Graph-based methods,
such as Dijkstra’s Algorithm [2][3], A* Algorithm family
[4][5]; Bionics-based methods, such as Ant Colony Algorithm [6] and Particle Swarm Optimization [7]; Samplebased methods [8], such as Rapidly-exploring Random Trees
(RRT) family.
The traditional path planning algorithms have been proved
to achieve the global optimum in the static network, but
the efficiency will decrease greatly with the expansion of
the road network, and they are no longer applicable to the
∗

The corresponding author, licongd@mail.sysu.edu.cn
The authors are with School of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China

978-1-6654-6880-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

Fig. 1.

Global path planning based on DRL framework

real traffic environment in complex and dynamic road conditions. Many scholars have studied accelerated optimization
schemes for the above algorithms, such as Contraction Hierarchies (CH) [9], Highway Hierarchies (HH) [10], and the
Customizable Route Planning (CRP) [11]. These optimization algorithms realize the requirements of real-time response
by using hierarchical processing of road structure and realtime information, therefore they can support the basic path
planning services of current industrial map products.
The success of machine learning has attracted many scholars in recent years. Many studies tend to predict traffic flow
[12], disaster risks [13][14], traffic congestion [15][16], etc.
In addition, some studies have also attempted to deal with
traffic problems at junctions, such as controlling traffic light
signals [17] and navigating vehicles at occluded junctions
[18]. There are few existing studies on path control, most
of them are based on robots, which do not need to consider
strict traffic rules and network, and are unsuitable for actual
vehicle traffic planning tasks. Reinforcement learning is also
applied to path planning research [19][20]. This method
models the task as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) by
defining vehicle path planning as a decision sequence, and
solves the real-time path optimization problem by observing
and evaluating the action results in the complex environment
[21]. [22] demonstrated the effectiveness of Q-learning for
path planning problems in SUMO simulator. Then, the
authors designed a suitable reward function and a ComboDQN framework to cope with more complex transportation
network, and proposed a distance ranking sampling strategy
to speed up the convergence [23].
It still lacks route decision methods involving real traffic networks to help users find the optimal route to the
destination and avoid traffic congestions with vehicle-road

3010

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

collaborations. So in this paper, we propose an A*-assisted
deep reinforcement learning algorithm and introduce multidimensional observation information from Vehicle-Road
collaborations to design a more effective vehicle global path
planning system (Fig.1). The primary novelties of our work
are as follows:
(1) We choose multi-dimensional and reasonable observation information with vehicle-road collaborations as the feature input of agent’s action policy network. The observation
information that a single agent can obtain during the driving
process is limited. However, we want to obtain as much road
conditions as possible in the global path planning problem.
These information are crucial for the agent’s brain to learn
a better policy quickly.
(2) To avoid useless early explorations in the training
process of the agent, we combine A* algorithm to exclude
all the paths that cannot reach the destination or exceed the
expected time, and provide some heuristic guidance in the
early stage of exploration.
(3) We propose a policy network that uses state + action
as feature input and Q value of current action as output. Each
junction may have different numbers of road as choices in
actual traffic scenarios, this framework makes the vehicle
agent more flexible to deal with different traffic conditions.
These ideas aim at improving the convergence speed and
enhancing generalization performance of the model, which
make the model more suitable for complex path planning
tasks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II models the global path planning as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) problem and expounds the feasibility of
reinforcement learning. Section III describes our proposed
algorithm in detail. Section IV analyzes the simulation results
of our algorithm and conclusions are provided in Section V.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In the vehicle global path planning problem, the path
choices of a vehicle only depend on the current state of the
road, but are irrelevant to the previous states. This state transition is Markov-compliant and the problem can be modeled
as a MDP. We assume that the history of all previous states
of the vehicle is denoted by ht = {s1 , s2 , s3 , ..., st }, then
the global path planning satisfies the following conditions:
p(st+1 |st ) = p(st+1 |ht ),

(1)

p(st+1 |st , at ) = p(st+1 |ht , at ).

(2)

The global path planning task consists of five elements
< S, A, P, R, γ >, where S is the set of finite states, that
is, the set of all possible paths of the planning task from the
start point to the destination; A is the set of finite actions,
contains the set of all paths can be chosen by the agent; P is
the state transition probability matrix; R is a reward function,
indicating how much reward the vehicle can get when it
arrives a certain path; γ is the discount factor, indicating the
importance of future rewards in the current state.

In planning problems, we give positive rewards when the
vehicle travels to the best path, and give punishment if the
vehicle travels to the path with traffic congestions. By adding
all the returns to calculate an expectation, we get the state
value function for path evaluation as
Vπ (s) = Eπ [Gt |st |s]
= Eπ [Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ 2 Rt+3 + ...+
γ

T −t−1

(3)

RT |st = s],

where policy π is the action distribution for the state, and
return Gt represents the superposition of all the discounted
rewards obtained in the current state.
The change of the Markov state depends on which road
the vehicle chooses in the current state. The Q function is
used to evaluate the state-action value:
qπ (s, a) = Eπ [Gt |st |s, At = a].

(4)

According to Bellman expectation equation, we have
Vπ (s) = Eπ [Rt+1 + γVπ (st+1 )|st = s],

(5)

qπ (s, a) = Eπ [Rt+1 + γqπ (st+1 , At+1 )|st = s, At = a].
(6)
Then, we can get the relationship between the state value
function and Q function:
X
Vπ (s) =
π(a|s)qπ (s, a).
(7)
a∈A

Based on equations (1)-(5), the global path planning
problem can be expressed as how to find an optimal policy
to maximize optimal value function,
v ∗ (s) = max Vπ (s),
π

(8)

where v ∗ is the maximum reward that the vehicle can get
for each path before reaching the end. By maximizing the Q
function, the optimal policy is shown as follows:

1 if a = arg max q ∗ (s, a)
a∈A
(9)
π ∗ (a|s) =
0 otherwise
.
The optimal policy is usually deterministic and stable,
but not necessarily unique, since it is possible for multiple
actions to achieve the same maximum value.
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
Fig.2 provides an overview of our global path planning
algorithm training framework, which consists of three parts.
The first part is the SUMO environment, which includes the
construction of urban traffic simulation and the feedback of
real-time environment information. The second part is the
design of deep reinforcement learning for the training and
optimization of the agent, and we embed the agent into
the vehicle to be responsible for the dynamic navigation.
The third part is the interface connecting the agent and
the environment, which is responsible for the transmission

3011
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ters continuously by using gradient descent to minimize the
loss function:
Li (θi ) =E(s,a,r,si )∼U (D) [(r + γ max
q(s′ , ai ; θi− )
′
a

− q(s, a; θi ))2 ],

Fig. 2.

Vehicle path planning framework

of environment and policy information, and controls the
stepping and termination of the simulation.
Our objective is to make the agent’s policy network
converge stably to the optimal policy. In each training step,
the agent stores the current state s, action a, the reward
′
obtained from the environment r and the next state s (an
experience) in the memory after each path choice, and uses
the experiences to train and update the policy network.
A. DRL design
To obtain the Q function, the Nature-DQN can be used
to design our global path planning algorithm. Nature-DQN
uses deep neural network to approximate the Q function:
qπ (s, a) ≈ qπ (s, a; θ), where θ is the parameter of neural
network. DRL can not only extract the features that are
not easily detected from the information of high latitude,
but also take into account the dynamic decision of complex
environment, which is very suitable for the study of dynamic
path planning under complex road network. Before the
learning start, Q value is initialized to a fixed value (depends
on θ). At each time t, the agent chooses the action at to get a
reward rt , the Q function is updated and the agent move into
the next state St+1 . The algorithm has two features in the
training process. The first one is Temporal-Difference (TD).
According to the Bellman equation we have,
X
q(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ
P (s′ |s, a)V (s′ ),
(10)
s′ ∈s

so we can sum the actual reward of the current state and the
Q-value of the next state to approximate the Q-value of the
current state. The training process of the Q-function can be
expressed as:
q(st , at ) ← q(st , at )+α·[rt +γ max q(st+1 , at )−q(st , at )],
π
(11)
where α is the learning rate, and γ is the discount factor.
The other feature is Different Policy (DP), that is, the
action policy and the evaluation policy are not the same. The
action policy uses the ϵ−greedy policy, while the evaluation
policy uses the greedy maxπ Q(s, a).
For Nature-DQN, the core of the algorithm is to determine
θ to approximate Q function. We tune the network parame-

(12)

where θi− is the target network parameters and θi is the
evaluation network parameters.
In addition, DRL emphasizes four elements: observation/state, agent, action and reward. Each element will be
explained in detail as follows.
1) State/Observation: In the global path planning problem, the information that the vehicle can observe is limited,
however, the multiple observations enable the agent to make
better choices. First, we consider that the vehicle has stored
the static map information, and the following features can
be obtained:
• Pv : The absolute position of the vehicle in cartesian
coordinates (Xv , Yv ).
• Pd : The absolute position of the destination in cartesian
coordinates (Xd , Yd ).
• Nl : Number of lanes.
• L : Length of road.
• D : The distance from the end of the road to the
destination, obtained by the A* algorithm.
We assume that when the vehicle makes a decision on the
route, the Road Side Unit (RSU) will feedback the following
information in real-time:
• Nv : Number of vehicles on the road
• Va : Average speed of all vehicles (default=Vm ,)
• Vm : Maximum speed limit
Considering that the traffic flows of the network
have the similar characteristic in the same time period,
we define the state as a vector [|Xv − Xd |, |Yv −
Yd |, Nl , L, D, Nv , Va , Vm , T imeperiod]. The vectors
are fed into the policy network to choose the best path.
The acquisition of these features is reasonable and will not
involve privacy issues.
2) Action: Action refers to the choice of path made by
the vehicle agent. In our model, the action space is defined as
the finite set of all roads that the vehicle can choose at each
junction, so it is discrete and dynamic. In the real traffic
network, the action space contains at most four actions:
[ST RAIGHT, LEF T, RIGHT, RET U RN ].
3) Agent: The agent senses the current environment and
affects the environment through actions. We consider the
action space that the agent can get at different junctions may
be different. For example, the action space that the vehicle in
the current junction is [ST RAIGHT, LEF T, RIGHT ],
while in the next junction is [ST RAIGHT, RET U RN ].
Since the output dimension of the neural network is fixed,
framework(b) needs to set default values for the non-existent
states, and we can’t evaluate whether these default values
will affect the training of the policy network. So we adopt
framework(a) as our policy network, which is shown in Fig.3.

3012
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: Global path planning based on A*-DQN
1
2
3
4
5
6

Fig. 3.

Policy network frameworks

7
8

4) Reward: Reward is the most direct experience for
agent. The agent judges its own policy by obtaining rewards
from the actual environment, and chooses actions with the
highest return to approach the goal. The design of the reward
needs to let the agent know what it has learned, otherwise
the policy network may not converge, or the result may
not be optimal. In general, reward is designed with simple
principles.
In our work, the global path planning is a time optimization problem, so we choose the optimization objective
to design the reward mechanism. For other cases, one can
simply modify the reward as distance, cost, etc. When the
agent chooses an action, the environment feedbacks expected
travel time of the action as an immediate reward:
(
−(Lst+1 /Vat+1 ) on the way
(13)
rs =
0
reach the end,
where Va =1 if average speed is 0. The negative sign indicates
that the travel time of the vehicle is inversely related to the
reward.

9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Initialization:
initialize the eval network with random parameters θ
initialize the target network with θ − = θ
initialize the memory store D
initialize feature dimension N ; discount factor γ
Training:
for episode=1,M do
initialize SUMO environment; exploration rate ϵ;
induction rate η
repeat
observe state s and obtain action space A
filter actions by A*
with probability η select a by A*
with probability ϵ select random choice a
otherwise select a = arg max q(s, a; θ)
a∈A

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

receive reward r and observe next state s′
store experience [s, a, r, s′ ] in D
if memory counter mod CAPICITY = 0 then
sample mini-batches from D
update eval network parameters θ
end
D=∅
until simulation is terminal;
obtain travel time Ttotal and total reward Rtotal
if learn counter mod TARGET = 0 then
update target network parameters θ − = θ
end
end

B. A* assisted
In the training process, the agent needs to use the so called
Exploration in the early stage to obtain the information
of the road network as much as possible. And choose the
path based on the learned experience in the later stage,
which is called Exploitation. Exploitation is effective for
maximizing the current expected benefit, while Exploration
may maximize overall benefits in the long turn.
In the real complex traffic network, we found that in the
early exploration of the agent, some paths could not reach
the end, or it takes longer time than expected to reach the
end, which we called Invalid Exploration. So in our work,
the A* algorithm is used in the early exploration of the agent
to reduce Invalid Exploration. We improve the algorithm
in four aspects:
1) When the agent chooses an action, it uses the A*
algorithm to determine whether the current action can
reach the end point. If not, exclude the action.
2) If the action can reach the destination, the agent judges
whether the expected time is exceeded when the agent
executes the action to reach the end (the distance is
calculated from A*). If it exceeds, exclude the action.
3) In the early stage of exploration, the agent chooses
the path obtained by the A* algorithm with a certain
probability.

4) The distance from the current state to the destination is
calculated by the A* algorithm as an input feature of
the policy network.
The overall algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Simulation experiments
We use SUMO to build a real traffic network simulation
environment. SUMO is a free and open source traffic simulation suite, supporting both macro and micro traffic simulation
[24]. Real world maps can be incorporated into SUMO for
simulation. It can also define the vehicle’s departure and
arrival attributes, such as lane, speed, and position. In order
to control the vehicle and feedback traffic information in real
time, SUMO provides Traffic Control Interface (TraCI) giving access to a running road traffic simulation. It is allowed
to retrieve values of simulated objects and to manipulate their
behavior “on-line”.
In our experiments, we aim to achieve real-time route optimization in vehicle point-to-point tasks, so we use two urban
maps that converted from OpenStreetMap via the SUMO
method called NETCONVERT, to verify the effectiveness of
the proposed algorithm, which are shown in Fig.4. We use
randomT rips.py provided by SUMO to generate random

3013
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4.

Real world city maps for SUMO environment

traffic flows in our traffic network. The experiments set
different traffic flows in each map and use the proposed
algorithm to control the path selection of individual vehicle.
To demonstrate the performance of the proposed method, A*
algorithm and Nature-DQN are compared.
B. Deep neural network architecture
The training hyper-parameters are shown in Table I. Our
policy neural network contains five fully connected layers
with three hidden layers. The training episodes increase with
the complexity of the map, and the exploration rate and
induction rate will decrease with the convergence of the
model. We consider the global time optimization, rather than
choosing the shortest path locally, the future reward is very
important to the current state return calculation, therefore the
discount factor is set to 0.99.
TABLE I
H YPER - PARAMETERS FOR TRAINING
Parameter

Value

Episodes
Adam optimizer learning rate
Exploration rate
Induction rate
Replay memory size
Target network update frequency
Discount factor
Mini-batch for update

5000/8000
0.001
0.8 → 0.01
0.2 → 0
3000
15
0.99
8

Table II. At the beginning of training, the agent does not
know the optimal policy, and it is in the exploration stage.
The agent has more chances to choose actions randomly,
and accumulate experience. During the training process, the
agent continues to optimize its policy network, and learns
from experiences to take actions that maximize the total
reward. Map 2 is more complex (reflected in the number
of edges, nodes and traffic lights) than Map1, and the agent
needs to explore more unknown environments to learn more
experience, therefore the model convergence time is longer
than Map 1. For the same map, the increase of vehicles on
the road will increase the uncertainty of the environment and
make a higher possibility of traffic congestion. So there are
more peaks in training process, and the convergence speed
will be slower.
The performance of convergence between the proposed
algorithm and Nature-DQN is shown in Fig.6. In early training, our algorithm avoids the invalid exploration, allowing
the policy network to converge faster. However the NatureDQN explores invalid paths and collects bad experiences
into memory library, which leads to a longer convergence
time. In the experiments, we also found that there is a
situation in which the Nature-DQN always samples bad
experiences to update the policy network, then the policy
network chooses the bad path, resulting agent collects more
bad experiences and cannot learn the optimal policy or even
cannot convergence.
Table III shows the average travel time of our proposed
algorithm compared to the other algorithms. The results show
that the proposed method outperforms other algorithms in
all of the traffic conditions. Compared with A* algorithm,
our proposed method reduces about 10.8%, 11.8% and 8.6%
traveling time with different traffic flows in Map1, and
reduces about 58.3%, 43.0% and 42.7% traveling time with
different traffic flows in Map2. In addition, the convergence
results of Nature-DQN are similar to the proposed algorithm
because they are set the same observation vector.
TABLE III
T HE OBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS UNDER
A VARIOUS OF TRAFFIC CONDITIONS .
Map1
Nvehicle

TABLE II
M AP INFORMATION

Total edges
Total nodes
Num of traffic light
Numlanes range
Edge max speed range(kmph)
Traffic density

City Map1

City Map2

84
44
0
1-2
50-80
20/50/100

143
64
4
1-3
20-100
100/200/400

Map2

20

50

100

200

400

A*

129.7

134.4

100
138.7

545.9

691.41

728.1

DQN

116.2

126.5

130.3

274.5

415.9

417.4

A*-DQN

115.6

118.5

126.7

227.3

393.7

416.5

V. CONCLUSIONS

C. Results and Discussions
Fig.5 shows the convergence of proposed algorithm on two
different maps. Details of the map information are given in

This paper studies the Vehicle-Road collaborative path
planning based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. By introducing multi-dimensional observations, using the A* algorithm for induction in the early stage of exploration,
and rationally designing the architecture of the decisionmaking network, our proposed algorithm has better performance in complex and dynamic traffic road networks. The

3014
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5.

The training curves of our algorithm. (a) and (b) correspond to map1, (c) and (d) are for map2.

experimental results show that the algorithm is effective
in path optimization with faster training and less driving
time, especially with real-time changing and complex road
conditions.

Fig. 6. The training curves compared between the proposed algorithm and
Nature-DQN. (Map1, Nvehicle = 20)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) with grant no. 61901534,
in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Key Project 2019B1515120032,
in part by the Science, Technology and Innovation
Commission of Shenzhen Municipality with grant no.
JCYJ20210324120002007, JCYJ20190807155617099 and
SYSU-A202106.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Qiao, Y. Li, D. Chen, S. Serikawa, M. Guizani, and Z. Lv, “A survey
on 5g/6g, ai, and robotics,” Computers & Electrical Engineering,
vol. 95, pp. 107 372–, 2021.
[2] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
Numerische Mathematik, 1959.
[3] P. Eklund, S. Kirkby, and S. Pollitt, “A dynamic multi-source dijkstra’s
algorithm for vehicle routing,” in 1996 Australian New Zealand
Conference on Intelligent Information Systems. Proceedings. ANZIIS
96, 1996, pp. 329–333.
[4] A. Patel, “Introduction to the a* algorithm,” 2014, https://www.
redblobgames.com/pathfinding/a-star/introduction.html.
[5] X. Wang and T. Ye, “Research on robot path planning based on
improved a* algorithm,” Computer Measurement & Control, 2018.
[6] C. Wu, S. Zhou, and L. Xiao, “Dynamic path planning based on
improved ant colony algorithm in traffic congestion,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 180 773–180 783, 2020.
[7] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proceedings of ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks,
vol. 4, 1995, pp. 1942–1948 vol.4.

[8] M. Elbanhawi and M. Simic, “Sampling-based robot motion planning:
A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 2, pp. 56–77, 2014.
[9] R. Geisberger, P. Sanders, D. Schultes, and D. Delling, “Contraction
hierarchies Faster and simpler hierarchical routing in road networks,”
in International Workshop on Experimental and Efficient Algorithms,
2008.
[10] P. Sanders and D. Schultes, “Engineering highway hierarchies,” Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 2012.
[11] D. Delling, A. Goldberg, T. Pajor, and R. Werneck,
“Customizable route planning,” in Proceedings of the 10th
International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms (SEA’11),
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Verlag,
May 2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/customizable-route-planning/
[12] D. Xu, P. Peng, C. Wei, D. He, and Q. Xuan, “Road traffic network
state prediction based on a generative adversarial network,” IET
Intelligent Transport Systems, no. 3, 2020.
[13] L. Zhu, T. Li, and S. Du, “Ta-stan: A deep spatial-temporal attention
learning framework for regional traffic accident risk prediction,” in
2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
2019, pp. 1–8.
[14] S. Lai, C. Zhou, X. Song, and X. Zhang, “A traffic accident risk
prediction model based on spatial gated memory network,” in 2021
International Conference on Electronic Information Engineering and
Computer Science (EIECS), 2021, pp. 331–335.
[15] L. Li, H. Lin, J. Wan, Z. Ma, and H. Wang, “Mf-tcpv: A machine
learning and fuzzy comprehensive evaluation-based framework for
traffic congestion prediction and visualization,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 227 113–227 125, 2020.
[16] W. Hu, H. Wang, and L. Yan, “An actual urban traffic simulation model
for predicting and avoiding traffic congestion,” in 17th International
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2014,
pp. 2681–2686.
[17] Y. Liu, L. Liu, and W.-P. Chen, “Intelligent traffic light control using
distributed multi-agent q learning,” in 2017 IEEE 20th International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2017, pp.
1–8.
[18] X. Lin, M. Li, Z. Shen, Y. Yin, and F. He, “Rhythmic control of
automated traffic part ii Grid network rhythm and online routing,”
2020.
[19] A. Haydari and Y. Yilmaz, “Deep reinforcement learning for intelligent
transportation systems: A survey,” arXiv, 2020.
[20] B. Khamidehi and E. S. Sousa, “Distributed deep reinforcement
learning for intelligent traffic monitoring with a team of aerial robots,”
in 2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), 2021, pp. 341–347.
[21] A. Tamar, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel, “Value iteration networks,” 2016.
[22] S. S. Koh, B. Zhou, P. Yang, Z. Yang, H. Fang, and J. Feng,
“Reinforcement learning for vehicle route optimization in sumo,”
in 2018 IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Communications; IEEE 16th International Conference
on Smart City; IEEE 4th International Conference on Data Science
and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), 2018, pp. 1468–1473.
[23] S. Koh, B. Zhou, H. Fang, P. Yang, and Z. Ji, “Real-time deep
reinforcement learning based vehicle routing and navigation,” Applied
Soft Computing, 2020.
[24] P. A. Lopez, M. Behrisch, L. Bieker-Walz, J. Erdmann, and E. Wiener,
“Microscopic traffic simulation using sumo,” in The 21st IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2018.

3015
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:32:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

