Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

2025 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI) | 979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICICI65870.2025.11069577

Adaptive Reinforcement Learning Framework for
Environmentally Sustainable Route Optimization
1st Gurwinder Singh

2nd Ranjan Walia

3rd Khushbu Cheetu

Department of AIT-CSE
Chandigarh University
Punjab, India
singh1001maths@gmail.com

Department of CSE-APEX & UCRD
Chandigarh University
Punjab, India
ranjan.e14288@cumail.in

Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Chandigarh University
Punjab, India
khushbu.e16075@cumail.in

4th Veeramanickam M.R.M
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Chandigarh University
Mohali, Punjab, India
manic.veera@gmail.com
Abstract—In the era of rapid urbanization and environmental challenges, achieving sustainable transportation solutions
has become a critical focus for researchers and policymakers.
This paper proposes an adaptive reinforcement learning framework for environmentally sustainable route optimization utilizing
the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) approach. The proposed framework integrates live traffic updates, road-conditions,
weather information and emissions metrics to dynamically adjust
routes, minimizing travel time and environmental impact. A
reward function is designed to prioritize emission reduction, fuel
efficiency, and travel time, with adaptive weights that shift based
on changing environmental priorities. Extensive evaluations are
conducted, comparing the proposed PPO-based framework with
existing methods such as Deep Q-Networks (DQN), Genetic
Algorithm, A*, and Hybrid RL-Metaheuristics. The results
demonstrate significant improvements in fuel efficiency (35.2%),
emission reduction (40.8%), and travel time reduction (30.5%)
compared to other methods. The framework’s adaptability and
real-time decision-making capabilities make it highly suitable
for large-scale, dynamic transportation networks. This study
highlights the potential of reinforcement learning in transforming
route optimization into a sustainable and data-driven process,
offering a scalable solution for smart cities and future mobility
systems.
Index Terms—Sustainable route optimization, reinforcement
learning, adaptive framework, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), environmental sustainability, traffic management,
scheduling, fuel efficiency.

I. INTRODUCTION
Amidst accelerating urban growth and rising ecological
concerns, the need for sustainable transport solutions has significantly become important. Traditional scheduling or routing
techniques often prefer time and cost -effectiveness of travel
without assessing the environmental impact or footprints.
This work addresses the gap by suggesting an adaptive reinforcement learning framework that integrates real-time data
to adapt the routes for environmental stability. Framework
benefits from Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm
to dynamically adjust the routes based on traffic density, road
conditions, weather and emission data in real time.

Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) models
has ensured considerable progress in transport, focusing on
improving fuel efficiency and reducing emissions. This study
evaluates the proposed method against other existing methods
such as Deep Q-Networks (DQN), genetic algorithm, A* and
hybrid RL-Matahuristics as other existing algorithms. The
goal is to achieve a balance between travel time and reduce
the environmental impact, and ensure adaptability in relation
to the real world conditions. This article emphasizes how
learning reinforcement can make the traditional route plan a
sustainable, data-driven process, which can contribute to smart
cities and green urbanization.
The primary objectives are as follows:
1) To develop an adaptive reinforcement learning platform
based on PPO algorithm for conducting environmentally
sustainable route optimization.
2) To Integrate the route optimization system with real-time
data of traffic density and road conditions with emission
statistics.
3) To evaluate and prove its ability in fuel efficiency
improvement and emission reduction along with travel
time optimisation.
The problem of route optimization with sustainable transport is conceived as a decision-making scheduling process
aimed at reducing the environmental impact while maintaining
travel efficiency. The aim is to adapt the routes depending
on traffic-flow, weather-information, road and other dynamic
conditions. Using reinforcement learning agents explore and
learn to maximize multiple reward values which represent
environmental longevity and increased efficiency together with
time reduction objectives. The framework incorporates a reward system which selects between different operational targets based on present environmental conditions. The decision
framework gives priority to pollution reduction in time periods
when air pollution reaches high levels yet focuses on time
efficiency in low-traffic situations. By taking advantage of

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

828

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

PPO, the proposed framework adapt dynamically as per roadconditions and emission levels, and also ensures a balance between efficiency and stability. Unlike traditional route planning
methods that mainly focus on travel time or cost, this study
introduces an adaptive, intelligent decision -making system
that optimizes the routes in response to the environmental
variables. The findings from this study can provide valuable
insight to urban planners and decision makers, who contribute to the development of smart, environmentally friendly
transport systems that correspond to the wide goals of green
urbanization and sustainable mobility.

trial applications [24] and sustainable traffic management in
cities [23]. Efforts to integrate AI-driven routing and communication protocol optimization for autonomous vehicles have
also enhanced the reliability of vehicle communication networks [25]. These diverse studies provide a strong foundation
for this research, which seeks to develop a novel framework
for environmentally sustainable route planning using ML and
reinforcement learning approaches.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Integration and Preprocessing

II. LITERATURE SURVEY
The progressive growth of sustainable transportation system
has witnessed significant improvements with the integration
of machine learning models and optimization techniques by
using different hybrid techniques. Likewise some studies have
focused on designing green route systems as a method to decrease distribution-related environmental effects [1] along with
developing time-based solutions for two-level vehicle routing
problems [2]. Dynamic traffic assignment models laid a solid
foundation for environmentally sustainable road transportation
[3], while innovative energy supply security models addressed
risk-based routing challenges for the Aegean Islands [4]. The
rise of deep learning significantly improved traffic flow prediction [5], further supported by real-time traffic flow prediction
models using ML [6]. Implementations of deep Q-networks
(DQN) highlighted the potential of reinforcement learning in
real-time vehicle route optimization for urban resilience [7].
Beyond traffic optimization, ML models were applied for ecofriendly logistics in road freight with profit prediction [8]
and in optimizing fresh fruit supply chains under resource
constraints [9]. More recently, machine learning-based secure
communication technologies have enhanced the Internet of
Vehicles (IoV), ensuring robust and efficient vehicular communication [10]. ML-enabled intelligent transportation systems
have contributed to sustainable urban mobility by improving
traffic management and reducing environmental impact [11].
Recent studies have expanded the scope of ML applications in transportation, focusing on stochastic multi-objective
vehicle routing models for customer satisfaction in green
environments [12]. Last-mile logistics optimization using ML
has gained significant traction, especially in creating more
efficient and sustainable parcel delivery networks [13]. Reinforcement learning has been instrumental in traffic signal
control optimization [14], while predictive models for metro
ridership influenced by urban zoning strategies have facilitated
better public transit planning [17]. Adaptive large neighborhood search methods using deep reinforcement learning have
further improved capacitated electric vehicle routing [22]. In
addition, multi-criteria deep reinforcement learning framework
have optimized transit signal priority for traffic safety and
efficiency [20]. Advanced reinforcement learning and metaheuristic combinations have addressed safe and sustainable
tourist trip design problems [21]. Other studies investigated
machine learning frameworks for traffic management in indus-

The proposed framework leverages the Indian Cities Distance Dataset [26] for route optimization, integrating static
city-to-city distance data with simulated real-time information viz. traffic density, weather conditions, and emissions
levels. This combination ensures dynamic and context-aware
decision-making within the reinforcement learning framework.
The data preprocessing involves several key steps to clean,
transform, and integrate the static and real-time data streams
effectively.
•

•

•

•

•

Data Collection: The Indian Cities Distance Dataset provides a foundational set of city pairings with their corresponding distances. To simulate real-world conditions,
additional data on traffic density, weather information,
and emissions is incorporated from sources such as simulated traffic APIs and weather services. This allows the
model to adjust routing decisions based on dynamically
changing conditions.
Data Cleaning and Validation: Although the dataset provides accurate distance information, the simulated realtime data may contain missing or inconsistent values.
Redundant and incomplete records are filtered out, and
missing values are imputed using interpolation methods.
Outlier detection is applied to ensure data quality.
Data Transformation and Normalization: The static distance data and real-time variables are transformed into
a consistent format for seamless integration. Continuous
variables such as traffic density and emissions are normalized to a fixed range, ensuring stable training of the
reinforcement learning agent.
Real-Time Data Simulation and Integration: Since the
Indian Cities Distance Dataset is static, real-time conditions such as traffic congestion and weather effects are
simulated and updated at regular intervals. This simulated
data is integrated into the reinforcement learning agent,
enabling it to make dynamic decisions that adapt to
current conditions.
Feedback Loop and Continuous Learning: The framework
incorporates a feedback loop where routing decisions
are evaluated based on travel time, fuel efficiency, and
emissions reduction. This evaluation allows the policy to
be continuously refined using updated data, improving the
overall performance and adaptability of the model over
time.

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

829

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

B. Reinforcement Learning Framework Design
The proposed framework employs Reinforcement Learning
(RL) to optimize route planning by considering environmental
sustainability. The following components form the basis of the
RL framework:
1) State Space (S): The state space represents all possible
conditions affecting the routing decisions. It is modeled as a
multidimensional vector:
(1)

St = [vt, ρt, rt, wt, et]

where:
• vt: Vehicle type (categorical variable for electric, hybrid,
combustion engine)
• ρt: Traffic density (vehicles/km)
• rt: Road conditions (discrete rating from 1 to 5)
• wt: Weather conditions (categorical for clear, rain, fog,
etc.)
• et: Real-time emissions data (CO2, NOx, PM2.5 in
µg/m3)
2) Action Space (A): The action space consists of decisions
that can be made at each state. The possible actions are:
• Selecting
between alternative routes A
=
{a1, a2, . . . , an}
• Adjusting speed (as ∈ [vmin, vmax])
• Dynamic rerouting based on changing conditions
3) Reward Function (R): The reward function incentivizes
actions that reduce environmental impact while maintaining
efficiency. It is defined as:
(2)

Rt = α · ∆Et + β · Ft − γ · Tt

where:
• ∆Et: Reduction in emissions compared to the baseline
route (measured in CO2 equivalents)
• Ft: Fuel efficiency gain (measured in liters saved per
kilometer)
• Tt: Travel time penalty (in minutes)
The weights α, β, and γ dynamically adjust based on the
context:
• α > β > γ during high pollution hours to prioritize
emissions reduction
• γ > α, β during traffic congestion to prioritize faster
travel
4) Dynamic Weight Adaptation: The weights α, β, and γ
are updated using a time-dependent adjustment rule:
αt = α0 · e−λt,

βt = β0 + κt,

γt = γ0 + µ sin(ωt) (3)

C. Algorithm Selection
Given the high-dimensional state space, two algorithms are
considered:
1) Deep Q-Networks (DQN): Employs a neural network
to estimate the Q-value function Q(s, a) and refines it
through the Bellman equation:
Q(st, at) = rt + γ max Q(st+1, a′)
a′

(4)

where γ is the discount factor.
2) Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO): A policygradient method that minimizes the following clipped
objective for stable learning:
LPPO(θ) = Et [min (rt(θ)At, clip(rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At)]
t
(5)
where rt(θ) represents the likelihood ratio of updated
versus previous policies, while At denotes the advantage
function.
Algorithm 1 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) Workflow
for Environmentally Sustainable Route Optimization
1: Initialization: Policy parameters θ, establish the value
function V , and empty memory buffer
2: for each episode do
3:
Set the initial state S0 based on live traffic conditions
and environmental factors
4:
while episode not terminated do
5:
Select action At as per policy πθ(St)
6:
Perform action At, record reward Rt and transition
to the next state St+1
7:
Save transition tuple (St, At, Rt, St+1) in memory
buffer
8:
end while
9:
Compute advantage estimates At for all transitions in
the memory buffer
10:
for Iterate through each step do
11:
Update policy parameters θ using the PPO objective:
12:
LPPO
t (θ) = Et [min (rt(θ)At, clip(rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At)]
13:
14:
15:
16:

Update value function Vθ(St) using mean squared
h
i
error loss:
2
LValue(θ) = 1 Et (Vθ(St) − Rt)
2

end for
end for

1) Pseudo-code for PPO-Based Reinforcement Learning
Framework:
D. Environmental Impact Integration
1) Emission Models: The emission models are based on the
calculation of Emissions from Road Transport methodology.
For each vehicle type, the emissions Et are calculated as:
Et = f (V, S, Fuel Type, Driving Conditions)

(6)

where f is a nonlinear function that accounts for speed, vehicle
type, and road conditions.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In Figure 1, the basic graph representation of cities is shown,
where each node represents a city, and edges represent the
possible travel routes between them. This graph provides the
foundational structure for the proposed routing framework. By
mapping these connections, the framework begins its process

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

830

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

of analyzing traffic flow and identifying key intersections that
influence route planning decisions. This visualization serves
as a starting point for applying centrality-based analysis and
community detection algorithms, which play a critical role in
subsequent stages of optimization.

Fig. 3. Community Detection in the Transportation Network for Regional
Route Optimization.

Fig. 1. Graph Representation of Cities and Route Connections in the
Transportation Network.

community are grouped together and marked with distinct
colors. These communities represent clusters of cities with
stronger internal connections. Using community detection algorithms, the proposed framework targets localized optimization within these clusters, enabling regional improvements in
travel efficiency and environmental sustainability. This step
helps in designing region-specific strategies for fuel reduction
and emissions control.

Fig. 2. Centrality Analysis: Identification of Critical Nodes Using Betweenness and Closeness Centrality

Figure 2 highlights centrality measures such as betweenness,
closeness, and eigenvector centrality, which are computed to
identify influential nodes in the transportation network. Nodes
with higher betweenness centrality, for instance, represent critical hubs that control traffic flow across multiple routes. The
insights derived from these metrics help prioritize which routes
should be optimized for reducing congestion and improving
overall travel time, aligning with the methodology’s focus on
traffic flow efficiency and sustainability.
Figure 3 presents a community-based visualization of the
transportation network, where nodes belonging to the same

Fig. 4. Road Condition Analysis: Visualization of Poor Road Conditions and
Recommended Alternative Routes

In Figure 4, the focus shifts to road condition analysis. Areas
with poor road conditions are marked in red, while alternative,
safer routes are suggested in green. This visualization is
derived from real-time data integration, as described in the
methodology, where IoT sensors and crowd-sourced data are
fused to detect road hazards and inform the route adjustment
process. These insights empower decision-makers to avoid

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

831

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

and better sustainability outcomes, albeit with a slightly higher
execution time than A*. Notably, the Deep Q-Network (DQN)
algorithm, although close in accuracy at 85.4%, shows less improvement in fuel efficiency and emission reduction compared
to the proposed method. The Hybrid Reinforcement Learningmetaheuristic algorithm also works well in many calculations,
but its long performance time (1.85s) makes it less suitable for
real -time applications. This insight reveals the adaptability of
the PPO structure and the ability to make real -time decisions,
which is important for dynamic and large transport networks.
Overall, the proposed framework provides a balanced solution, which effectively addresses trades between performance,
environmental impact and calculation efficiency.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE

Fig. 5. Dynamic Route Adjustment Based on Real-Time Traffic and Environmental Data

high-risk areas, improving safety and travel quality.
Finally, Figure 5 presents a comprehensive view of recommended routes after integrating data from traffic density, weather conditions, and emissions analysis. This figure
demonstrates how the proposed Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO)-based reinforcement learning framework dynamically
adjusts routes to balance multiple objectives—minimizing
emissions, improving fuel efficiency, and reducing travel time.
The adaptive approach ensures that the framework can respond
to real-time conditions and continuously learn from new data
to improve future recommendations.
TABLE I
EVALUATION METRICS COMPARISON OF PROPOSED PPO-BASED
FRAMEWORK WITH EXISTING ALGORITHMS
Algorithm

Accuracy (%)

Fuel Efficiency
(%)

Travel Time Reduction (%)

Execution
Time (s)

35.2

Emission
Reduction
(%)
40.8

Proposed PPO
Framework
DQN [7]
A* Algorithm [3]
Genetic
Algorithm [2]
Hybrid
RLMetaheuristic
[21]

92.5
85.4
78.2
80.6

30.5

1.25

25.3
20.0
24.8

30.5
22.5
25.3

20.1
18.2
22.0

1.45
0.95
2.35

88.1

30.5

35.1

28.7

1.85

The results presented in Table I demonstrate a comprehensive comparison between the proposed Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO)-based framework and several existing
algorithms commonly used in route optimization and sustainable transportation. The proposed framework significantly
outperforms other algorithms across most evaluation metrics,
particularly in fuel efficiency improvement (35.2%), emission
reduction (40.8%), and travel time reduction (30.5%). These
results validate the effectiveness of the PPO-based approach
in optimizing routes while prioritizing environmental sustainability and operational efficiency.
Compared to traditional algorithms such as A and Genetic
Algorithm*, the proposed framework offers higher accuracy

This study introduces a dynamic reinforcement learning
approach for optimizing environmentally sustainable routes
using the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) approach. By
integrating the live traffic analytics, road-conditions, weather
information, the proposed framework adjusts the routes to reduce travel-duration while reducing the environmental impact.
The results show that PPO-based frameworks outperforms
the traditional methods such as Deep Q-networks (DQN),
genetic algorithms, A* and hybrid RL in terms of metrics
such as fuel efficiency, emission reduction and travel time
optimization. These improvements validate the efficiency of
the proposed framework of balanced operating efficiency with
environmental stability. The insight gained from this study
contributes to the growing field with smart transport systems,
and provides a scalable and adaptable approach to making
real-time decisions in urban dynamic networks.
The proposed framework opens several ways for future
research in modelling the long-term traffic and pollution
patterns for the active decision-making ability. In addition,
the extension of the framework to include routing of electric
vehicles (EV) with battery optimization and the availability
of charging stations will make it very relevant to the growing
EV ecosystem. Finally, the distribution of structures in the real
urban environment and performing mass experiments will help
to validate its practical efficiency and scalability.
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. Gajanand and T. T. Narendran,” Green route planning to reduce the
environmental impact of distribution,” International Journal of Logistics
Research and Applications, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 410–432, 2013.
[2] M. Soysal, J. M. Bloemhof-Ruwaard, and T. Bektas¸,” The timedependent two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem with environmental considerations,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 164, pp. 366–378, 2015.
[3] Y. Wang, W. Y. Szeto, K. Han, and T. L. Friesz,” Dynamic traffic assignment: A review of the methodological advances for environmentally
sustainable road transportation applications,” Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, vol. 111, pp. 370–394, 2018.
[4] C. Iliopoulou, K. Kepaptsoglou, and O. Schinas,” Energy supply security
for the Aegean islands: A routing model with risk and environmental
considerations,” Energy Policy, vol. 113, pp. 608–620, 2018.
[5] Guo, Qi, Rui Li, Changjiang Zheng, and Gwanggil Jeon. "Design of
low-carbon planning model for vehicle path based on adaptive multistrategy ant colony optimization algorithm." PeerJ Computer Science 11
(2025): e2611.
[6] Pitakaso, Rapeepan, Kanchana Sethanan, Chen-Fu Chien, Thanatkij
Srichok, Surajet Khonjun, Natthapong Nanthasamroeng, and Sarayut
Gonwirat. "Integrating reinforcement learning and metaheuristics for
safe and sustainable health tourist trip design problem." Applied Soft
Computing 161 (2024): 111719.

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

832

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25L34-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-3830-9

[7] S. S. Koh, Realtime Vehicle Route Optimisation via DQN for Sustainable
and Resilient Urban Transportation Network, Liverpool John Moores
University, United Kingdom, 2020.
[8] A. Budak and P. A. Sarvari,” Profit margin prediction in sustainable
road freight transportation using machine learning,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 314, p. 127990, 2021.
[9] T.-D. Nguyen, T. Nguyen-Quang, U. Venkatadri, C. Diallo, and M.
Adams, ”Mathematical programming models for fresh fruit supply
chain optimization: a review of the literature and emerging trends,”
AgriEngineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 519–541, 2021.
[10] E. S. Ali, M. K. Hasan, R. Hassan, R. A. Saeed, M. B. Hassan, S. Islam,
N. S. Nafi, and S. Bevinakoppa,” Machine learning technologies for
secure vehicular communication in internet of vehicles: recent advances
and applications,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, no.
1, pp. 8868355, 2021.
[11] krishna Vaddy, Rama. "Ai and ml for transportation route
optimization." International Transactions in Machine Learning 5, no. 5
(2023): 1-19.
[12] N. Elgharably, S. Easa, A. Nassef, and A. El Damatty,” Stochastic multiobjective vehicle routing model in green environment with customer
satisfaction,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1337–1355, 2022.
[13] N. Giuffrida, J. Fajardo-Calderin, A. D. Masegosa, F. Werner, M.
Steudter, and F. Pilla,” Optimization and machine learning applied to
last-mile logistics: A review,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 9, p. 5329,
2022.
[14] Mane, Saniya Prasad, Gireesh Babu CN, Sai Shriyank DH, Soumyadeep
Ghosh, and Srujana S. Mavintop. "Optimizing Travel for a Greener
Future: AI-Driven Route Planning and Eco-Conscious Mobility."
In 2025 International Conference on Computing for Sustainability and
Intelligent Future (COMP-SIF), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2025.
[15] R. V. Krishna,” AI and ML for transportation route optimization,”
International Transactions in Machine Learning, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1–19,
2023.
[16] M. M. Mamoudan, A. Jafari, Z. Mohammadnazari, M. M. Nasiri, and M.
Yazdani,” Hybrid machine learning-metaheuristic model for sustainable
agri-food production and supply chain planning under water scarcity,”
Resources, Environment and Sustainability, vol. 14, p. 100133, 2023.
[17] A. H. AlKhereibi, T. G. Wakjira, M. Kucukvar, and N. C. Onat,”
P r e d i c t i v e machine learning algorithms for metro ridership based
on urban land use policies in support of transit-oriented development,”
Sustainability, vol. 15, no. 2, p. 1718, 2023.
[18] A. Ram´ırez-Villamil, J. R. Montoya-Torres, A. Jaegler, and J. M.
Cuevas-Torres,” Reconfiguration of last-mile supply chain for parcel
delivery using machine learning and routing optimization,” Computers
& Industrial Engineering, vol. 184, p. 109604, 2023.
[19] W. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, P. Fan, and W. Yue,” Environmental factors
for outdoor jogging in Beijing: Insights from using explainable spatial
machine learning and massive trajectory data,” Landscape and Urban
Planning, vol. 243, p. 104969, 2024.
[20] Y. Dong, H. Huang, G. Zhang, and J. Jin,” Adaptive Transit Signal
Priority Control for Traffic Safety and Efficiency Optimization: A MultiObjective Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework,” Mathematics, vol.
12, no. 24, p. 3994, 2024.
[21] R. Pitakaso, K. Sethanan, C.-F. Chien, T. Srichok, S. Khonjun, N.
Nanthasamroeng, and S. Gonwirat,” Integrating reinforcement learning
and metaheuristics for safe and sustainable health tourist trip design
problem,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 161, p. 111719, 2024.
[22] C. Wang, M. Cao, H. Jiang, X. Xiang, and X. Zhang,” A Deep
Reinforcement Learning-Based Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
for Capacitated Electric Vehicle Routing Problems,” IEEE Transactions
on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2024.
[23] A. Louati,” Machine learning framework for sustainable traffic management and safety in AlKharj city,” Sustainable Futures, vol. 9, p. 100407,
2025.
[24] A. B. Ige, P. A. Adepoju, A. O. Akinade, and A. I. Afolabi,” Machine
learning in industrial applications: An in-depth review and future directions,” 2025.
[25] A. K. Y. Dafhalla, M. E. Elobaid, A. E. Tayfour, A. Filali, N. M. O.
SidAhmed, T. A. Attia, B. A. I. Mohajir, J. S. Altamimi, and T. Adam,”
C o m p u t e r -Aided Efficient Routing and Reliable Protocol
Optimization for Autonomous Vehicle Communication Networks,”
Computers, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 13, 2025.
[26] K. B. Dharun, ”A-Star Algorithm Route Planning Dataset,”
Kaggle,
Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kbdharun/
a-star-algorithm-route-planning-dataset/data, 2023.

979-8-3315-3830-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 00:35:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

833

