IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

8037

Urban Multiple Route Planning Model Using
Dynamic Programming in Reinforcement Learning
Ningyezi Peng , Yuliang Xi, Jinmeng Rao, Xiangyuan Ma , and Fu Ren

Abstract— With the development of the economy and the
acceleration of urbanization, traffic congestion has become a
worldwide problem. Advances in mobile Internet and sensor
technologies have increased real-time data sharing, providing a
new opportunity for urban route planning. However, due to the
difficulty of handling complex global information, making correct
decisions in large-scale and complex traffic environments is a
problem that urgently needs to be solved. In this paper, a multiple
route planning model (multi-route dynamic programming (DP)
model) is proposed to solve the urban route planning problem
with traffic flow information. In particular, we adopt the DP
algorithm in this model, design a reward function suitable for
urban path planning problems, and generate multiple routes
based on the Q values. In addition, we design different scenarios
using real-world road networks to test our model. Through the
experiments, we demonstrate that our model has the potential
to yield optimal results under large-scale scenarios with high
efficiency. The advantages of integrating the distance contribution
index (DCI) in the reward function are also elaborated. Moreover,
our model can provide alternative routes to divert traffic from
the optimal route, thus mitigating the congestion drift problem.
Index Terms— Dynamic programming, model-based, multiple
route planning reinforcement learning, route planning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
S COUNTRIES undergo economic development and
urbanization, traffic congestion has become a universal
problem that increases fuel consumption and environmental

A

Manuscript received 20 August 2019; revised 16 July 2020,
7 December 2020, and 14 April 2021; accepted 17 April 2021. Date
of publication 25 May 2021; date of current version 8 July 2022. This work
was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of
China under Grant 2016 YFC 0803106 and in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Project 42071448. The Associate Editor
for this article was P. Wang. (Ningyezi Peng and Yuliang Xi are co-first
authors.) (Corresponding author: Fu Ren.)
Ningyezi Peng is with the School of Resources and Environmental Science,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China, also with the Key Laboratory of
Geographic Information Systems, Ministry of Education, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430079, China, and also with the Department of Land Surveying and
Geo-Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (e-mail:
ningyezi.peng@connect.polyu.hk).
Yuliang Xi is with the School of Resources and Environmental Science,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China, also with the Key Laboratory of
Geographic Information Systems, Ministry of Education, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430079, China, and also with the School of Internet, Anhui University,
Hefei 231699, China (e-mail: yuliangwhu@163.com).
Jinmeng Rao is with the GeoDS Lab, Department of Geography,
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail:
jinmeng.rao@wisc.edu).
Xiangyuan Ma and Fu Ren are with the School of Resources and Environmental Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China, and also with
the Key Laboratory of Geographic Information Systems, Ministry of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail: renfu@whu.edu.cn;
maxiangyuan@whu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2021.3075221

pollution. When a city has no measure to mitigate this
problem, traffic congestion can lead to many serious social
and economic issues [1], [2]. For governments, building new
roads is an effective choice, but this solution is expensive and
inefficient. For vehicle drivers, the most effective way to avoid
traffic jams is to obtain the latest traffic information and plan
reasonable routes.
Many classic algorithms aim to solve the route planning
problem, including four main categories: deterministic methods, heuristic methods, nature-inspired metaheuristic methods,
and reinforcement learning methods. Among the deterministic
methods, the representative algorithms are Dijkstra [3] and
Floyd [4]. Dijkstra calculates the shortest path from the origin
to all other nodes. Although many other algorithms have been
proposed since Dijkstra it is still an excellent algorithm that
reduces the amount of computational time and power needed
to find the shortest path [5]. Slightly different from Dijkstra,
Floyd calculates the shortest path between all node pairs.
The heuristic methods include A∗ [6], D∗ [7], and D∗
Lite [8] algorithms. The A∗ algorithm not only considers
the distance from the origin to the current node but also
uses a heuristic function to estimate the distance between
the current node and the destination [6]. Many scholars have
proposed a series of improvements based on the A∗ algorithm.
For example, the D∗ algorithm was successfully applied to
unmanned vehicle projects and achieved higher efficiency than
A∗ algorithms [7]. Later, Koenig proposed D∗ Lite, which is
a simpler version of the D∗ algorithm [8].
The deterministic and heuristic methods mentioned above
can achieve good results with simple objectives (normally the
shortest distance or travel time). However, with complex tasks,
it is difficult for human experts to design appropriate cost
functions for the Dijkstra algorithm or heuristic functions for
the A∗ algorithm. Nature-inspired metaheuristic methods have
the potential to address complex objectives. The ant colony
optimization (ACO) algorithm. [9], [10] is representative of
this category. It simulates the natural behaviour of ant foraging.
Each ant leaves a pheromone trail along the path it explores;
the optimal path contains the strongest pheromone. However,
the ACO algorithm needs to run long enough to find the
optimal result if the environment is large and complex.
RL methods are also good at making decisions under
a complicated transportation environment with a complex
objective. Model-free RL can generate a near-optimal
result without any prior knowledge of the transportation
system. In contrast, previous methods require an analytical

1558-0016 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT ROUTE P LANNING A LGORITHMS

model of the underlying transportation system derived from
significant assumptions and simplifications. Many scholars
have adopted model-free RL methods to solve routing
problems. Bazzan and Grunitzki [11] designed a multi-agent
route planning model based on Q-learning, in which each
agent determined the next direction at each intersection.
Similarly, Arokhlo et al. [12] developed a multi-agent RL
algorithm to plan the shortest route in real time and applied
it to simple and abstract network graphs. Koh et al. [13]
adopted Q-learning to help a vehicle find the right path in the
Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO) simulator. However,
it is difficult to apply model-free RL methods to large road
networks due to the long environmental exploration process.
Existing studies [11]–[14] experimented only on small road
networks (normally 10 to 50 nodes). Therefore, we adopt the
model-based RL method, which has a certain understanding of
the environment and tends to be substantially more efficient.
The comparison of different routing algorithms is represented
in Table I.
In this paper, prior knowledge of the road network structure
is given in the dynamic programming (DP) method [15], which
avoids unnecessary exploration and accelerates the learning
process. Compared with model-free RL methods, our model
has the potential to handle large-scale and complex road

networks with high efficiency. Additionally, our model can
generate multiple routes, while all the algorithms mentioned
above can output only one planning route, which tends to
result in the congestion drift problem [16] (traffic congestion
drifts from the original route to the newly planned route).
Specifically, drivers who receive route planning information
provided by previous algorithms may tend to drive to the same
road at the same time, thereby aggregating congestion [16].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the principle of the model-based RL
method. Based on this theory, Section III introduces the proposed urban multiple route planning model using DP (hereafter
called the multi-route DP model). Finally, the experiment and
results are presented in Section IV, and Section V provides a
conclusion and discussion.
II. R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
A. Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
RL is intended to learn an optimal policy from experiences
in which an agent interacts with an environment, and the
policy can lead to the maximization of a cumulative reward.
At each time step t, the agent observes features st of the
current environment, chooses the corresponding action at , and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: URBAN MULTIPLE ROUTE PLANNING MODEL USING DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

Fig. 1.

8039

Policy iteration process [15].

obtains a reward rt . Expected reward Rt is defined as follows:
T

Rt =
γ t −t rt  ,
(1)


Fig. 2.

(a) A road network and (b) the corresponding undirected graph.

t =t

where T is the last time step, t  is the next time step after
the current t, and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor. With
Rt , the value functions, namely, state value function V π (s)
and state-action value function Q π (s, a) estimate the expected
reward brought by action a taken in state s according to policy
π. The optimal policy is the π ∗ that maximizes V π (s) and
Q π (s, a).
Model-based RL is an important branch in the RL field.
Based on the known environment, namely, the known or
predictable state transition matrix among states, a model-based
RL problem is transformed into a DP problem or an optimal
control problem [15]. With the known environment, the DP
algorithm has high efficiency and strong generalizability compared to its model-free counterparts because there are fewer
unnecessary explorations. For this reason, we adopt the DP
algorithm in this paper. Although the requirement of limited
and discrete states and actions makes it difficult to apply DP in
many fields, the route planning problem meets this requirement
(see Section III-B).

TABLE II
E DGE ATTRIBUTES

TABLE III
N ODE ATTRIBUTES

B. Policy Iteration
Policy iteration is an important solution process of DP and
consists of policy evaluation and improvement. As shown
in Fig. 1, policy iteration starts from a random policy, and then
V π (s) is calculated to evaluate this policy. Then, the greedy
strategy is adopted to improve this policy. This procedure is
repeated until the policy converges. In this process, the V value
and Q value are calculated by the Bellman equation:

a
∗ 
Pss
(2)
V ∗ (s) = max [R(s  |s, a) + γ
 V (s )]
a

∗



Q (s, a) = R(s |s, a) + γ


s  ∈S

s  ∈S
a
∗  
Pss
 max a  Q (s , a )

(3)

which means that the optimal value functions of the current
state s can be obtained by the next state s  .
III. M ULTI -ROUTE DP M ODEL
A. Route Environments Modeling
We use an undirected graph to represent a road network.
The node represents the intersection, and the edge represents
the road segment. In Fig. 2, (a) is an example of the
vector representation of the road network, and (b) is the

corresponding undirected graph, whose nodes and edges
are V = {N1,N2, . . . ,N10} and E = {e1,e2, . . . ,e13},
respectively. Each edge has three attributes, and the node has
six, which are shown in Tables II and III, respectively.
B. Reinforcement Learning Elements
The state, action, state transfer probability, and reward
function are the four main elements in RL. (1) Every node
(intersection) in this route environment is a state s. (2) In
every state, the vehicle has several (normally no more than
6) driving directions, namely, action a, to choose from. Each
direction can lead the vehicle to another state. (3) The state
transfer probability refers to the probability that the vehicle
will be led to the next intersection when it selects such
an action at the current intersection. Clearly, it is always

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

TABLE IV
R EWARD F UNCTION

100% under the route planning context, since when a driving
direction is selected, the vehicle will be led to the specific
intersection, not others. (4) The reward function decides the
instant feedback to every chosen action and serves to guide the
agent to the destination, similar to the labelling of samples in
supervised learning. Clearly, the reward has a strong influence
on the result of the RL task. In this paper, we adopt the
idea of reward shaping [22], which requires the system to
reward the agent when its decisions make progress towards
the final goal and which requires the system to penalize
the agent when it moves away from the goal. In this way,
at each learning step, the agent obtains a reward or penalty,
which accelerates the learning process. As shown in Table IV,
the distance between the current state and the destination
and the distance between the next possible state and the
destination, TCI, road length, and other factors are taken into
account.
1) The Function of DistR and DCI in the Reward Function:
The parameter DC I is critical to the reward function. Without
it, Di st R will guide the agent in the wrong direction. We take
an example to demonstrate this problem. As shown in Fig. 3,
when the agent is at intersection A, it will head for B or
C. These two directions are closer to the destination than A;
therefore, Di st R is set to be positive (according to Table IV).
If we ignore the congestion (set Conges P to 0), then
R AB = MoveU + Di st R = L O SS × length AB + Di st R
= −0.00002 × 1.262 + 1,
R AC = MoveU + Di st R = L O SS × length AC + Di st R
= −0.00002 × 6.855 + 1.
Apparently, R AB > R AC . Therefore, the agent will choose
the direction heading for B. However, from Fig. 3. we see
that the subsequent road sections of B are far more distant
than those of C. The reason for this problem is that the
characteristics of the road network form are ignored.

Fig. 3.

The function of Dist R and DC I .

After introducing DC I ,
R AB = MoveU + Di st R × DC I
= L O SS × length AB + Di st R × DC I AB
= −0.00002 × 1.262 + 1 × 0.643,
R AC = MoveU + Di st R × DC I
= L O SS × length AC + Di st R × DC I AC
= −0.00002 × 6.855 + 1 × 0.961.
Evidently, R AB < R AC . In this case, the agent will choose
the direction heading for C, which is a better policy. From
this example, we find that DC I can measure how much
of a distance reduction the next possible intersections will
contribute to the agent. By combining DC I with Di st R,
the agent can avoid unnecessary detours.
C. Policy Iteration Process
Policy literation [15] is used to reach the optimal strategy.
By following this strategy, the vehicle can choose the right
directions in different intersections. In this case, we can
obtain the initial planned route. The policy iteration process
consists of two main parts, namely, policy evaluation and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: URBAN MULTIPLE ROUTE PLANNING MODEL USING DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

8041

Algorithm 1 Policy iteration (using iterative policy evaluation)
Initialize state value function V (s) = 0, f or s ∈ S
Initialize state-action value function Q (s, a) = 0, f or s ∈
S, a ∈ A
Initialize policy π0 with random value
a
Set state transition probability Pss
 to 1
Set discount factor γ to 1
For t=0, T do
For k=0, K do
Policy evaluation:
Using the Bellman
equation and synchronous

 a backups:
π(a|s) × (Rsa S + γ
Pss  Vk (s  )),
Vk+1 (s) =
a∈A

s  ∈S

where s  is a successor state of s and Rsa is the reward
function
Until Vk+1 (s) converges to a stable value
End For
Policy improvement:
πt +1
= arg Q πt (s, a), where Q πt (s, a) = Rsa
a

+γ
Pss
 Vk+1 (s )
s  ∈S

Until πT converges to π∗
End For

policy improvement, which are shown in Algorithm 1. In the
initialization part, we set all state value functions V (s) and
state-action value functions Q (s, a) to zero and initialize
random policy π0 . Then, the Bellman equation is used to
evaluate the policy and updates Vk+1 (s) until it converges to
a stable value. By using the updated V , we can update the Q
function and improve the policy by selecting the action with
the newly calculated maximum Q value. After several loops,
we can obtain the optimal policy π∗ .

Fig. 4.

The process of alternative path exploration.

Fig. 5.

The simple road network for case analysis.

D. Alternative Path Exploration
Classic route planning algorithms (Dijkstra or A∗ ) output
only a single result, which tends to result in the congestion
drift problem. By providing alternative paths, our method can
mitigate this problem. During the policy iteration process,
the Q values of every crossing in different directions are
recorded. The Q value is the cumulative reward expectation
that the agent chooses a specific action in a state, and the
initially planned result (path) follows the direction with the
maximum Q value. However, the directions with the second
and third largest Q values are also valuable. Therefore, we sort
all directions of the intersection where the initial path passes
according to the Q values. Based on the direction order, we can
explore different driving directions and output alternative paths
The specific exploration process is shown in Fig. 4. First,
we sort the Q values of each intersection in descending order.
Then, starting from the origin, all the intersections in the
initially planned path will go through an exploration loop.
For every intersection, the agent selects the second or third
direction (rather than the first) as the new action and is led
to the next possible states (intersections). For all of the next
possible intersections, the agent chooses the first direction,
and a new route is produced. If this new route can arrive at

the destination, then it is a usable alternative path; otherwise,
the next intersection in the initially planned path enters the
exploration loop.

E. An Example on a Simple Road Network
To demonstrate the solution process and the underlying
principle of our method, we first take a simple road network
environment (shown in Fig. 5) as an example.
1) Total Reward and Q Values: As suggested by Bellemare
et al. [23], we use the total reward and the policy’s estimated
action-value function Q to evaluate the solution process of the
simple environment. The total reward is the sum of all the
rewards that an agent collects in an episode. Fig. 6 shows that
the total reward is unstable at the beginning. After 10 episodes,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

TABLE V
T HE Q VALUES OF E VERY A CTION AT THE PASSED I NTERSECTIONS IN
I NITIAL PATH

TABLE VI
T HE Q VALUES OF E VERY A CTION AT THE S UBSEQUENT
I NTERSECTIONS OF C0
Fig. 6.

The change in the total reward.

it achieves a stable level, which means that the learning process
is making progress and the policy is being optimized.
Another metric, the predicted Q, is an estimate of the
discounted future reward the agent can obtain by following
the current policy at a certain state. As shown in Fig. 8, in the
beginning, all Q values were set to zero. After the agent
began to explore the intersections, the Q values all slightly
decreased. This was because, in the early stage of training,
the agent rarely reached the destination; therefore, it received
more negative than positive rewards. However, after episode 5,
the agent gradually reached the destination and received more
positive feedback; therefore, the Q values gradually increased
and became stable. Based on these Q values, we found the
initial path (C0-C4-C1-C2-C3-C_f, as shown in Fig. 7), which
followed the direction with the largest Q value.
2) Alternative Route Exploration:
According to
Section III-D, we take the passed intersections in the
initial path (C0, C4, C1, C2, C3) as the exploration objects.
Table V shows their Q values of different directions. The
initial path followed the largest Q values, and alternative path
exploration could follow the second (bold format) or the
third (italic format) largest Q values in Table V.
We took origin C0 as an example to explore alternative
paths. From Table VI, we know that C5 (the second largest Q
value) is the next most valuable direction to explore. For all
the next intersections, we choose the direction with the largest
Q value. From Table VI, we find that the direction to C2 is
the best action at C5. Similarly, C3 is chosen, and it leads
to destination C_f. As shown in Fig. 7, the travel time of the
alternative path (C0-C5-C2-C3-C_f) is 18 minutes 8 seconds,
while that of the initial path is 18 minutes 5 seconds.
IV. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Study Area and Road Network Preprocessing: Shenzhen
is a coastal city located in southern China, northeast of the
Pearl River Estuary, and it is located south of the Tropic of
Cancer, between 113◦46’ and 114◦37’ east in longitude and
between 22◦ 27’ and 22◦ 52’ north in latitude. The total area
of Shenzhen is approximately 1952.84 km2 [24].

Fig. 7.

The initial path and the alternative path.

After deleting unusable roads, storing the road attributes,
and building topological relations, the preprocessed road network in Shenzhen is shown in Fig. 9. This network contains
3536 edges (road sections) and 2245 nodes (intersections). The
total length of the road network is 2484.65 km. Few studies
have experimented on such a large-scale environment. The TCI
value of each road was obtained from the Baidu Map [21], and
different values were assigned with different colours in Fig. 9.
2) Evaluation Index: In the designed experiments, we use
the travel time as the evaluation index of planned routes.
Based on field research results [25] in Shenzhen, (4) is used
to calculate the travel time.
⎧
⎪
1,
TCI = 0
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪4/4 − T C I,
T C I ∈ (0, 1]
length ⎨
(4)
× 20/19 − 4T C I, T C I ∈ (1, 2]
T =
⎪
vd
⎪
⎪20/17 − 3T C I, T C I ∈ (2, 3]
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩5/5 − T C I,
T C I ∈ (3, +∞)
where v d is the expectation speed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: URBAN MULTIPLE ROUTE PLANNING MODEL USING DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

Fig. 8.

8043

The change in the Qπ (s,a) of every action at every intersection.

Fig. 9. The normal road networks of Shenzhen (edges: 3536; nodes: 2245).

Fig. 10.

3) Test Scenarios: We randomly chose 20 origin-destination
pairs as our test scenarios, as shown in Table VII. We compared our method with the Dijkstra algorithm. The main idea
of Dijkstra is to calculate the shortest path between any two
nodes step by step, starting from the origin to the destination.
It can guarantee to find the globally optimal result in a fully
known environment. Therefore, we used its results as the
optimal results to verify the correctness of our model.
The ArcGIS Network Analyst (NA) module (ArcGIS 10.2,
Esri, Redlands, State of California., USA, 2013.) was used
to solve for the optimal result of the Dijkstra algorithm. The
ArcGIS NA module has been widely used to derive optimal
routes in different studies [26]–[29]. In these experiments,
we took the TCI of every road section as the edge weight
in Dijkstra.
Apart from the correctness of our planned results, the model
efficiency was also tested. Model efficiency can reflect the
application value of our method. To test the sensitivity of
our model to different road network densities, we simplified
the original road network (Fig. 9) to Fig. 10. Specifically,

we deleted the roads with a width of less than 10 km and
kept the roads of level 3 and above. After the simplification,
Fig. 10 contains 719 edges and 495 nodes. The total length of
the road network is 1260.05 km. We slightly changed some
origin-destinations pairs in Table VII to make sure that the
points could exist in the two kinds of road networks (see
Appendix 2).
All experiments were tested on a ThinkPad-W540 notebook
(CPU i7-4790MQ, 16 G RAM, 1T SSD). Windows 10,
the.NET framework, and C# language were used to develop
all of the tested methods.

Simplified road networks (edges: 719; nodes: 495).

B. Experiments on Shenzhen City
1) Route Planning Results: The route planning results
of 20 test scenarios are shown in Fig. 11, and several map
visualization results are shown in Appendix 1. Fig. 11 shows
the travel time of the routes planned by our method as
percentages relative to the result of the Dijkstra algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8044

Fig. 11.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

The time costs of our method relative to those of Dijkstra.

TABLE VII
20 T EST S CENARIOS

Thus, the Dijkstra algorithm always scores 100% and results
that score above 100% are worse than the optimal result.
These results show that the optimal results of our method
are consistent with the results of Dijkstra, which means our
method has the potential to find the optimal results under
different scenarios. In addition, our method generates two or
three alternative routes with comparable time costs (Dijkstra
outputs only one optimal result), which can mitigate the
congestion drift problem caused by a single result. Our method
explores the road network environment thoroughly and obtains
comprehensive knowledge by trial and error. In this case, our
results yield not only an optimal path but also the driving
policy at each intersection. This driving policy can provide
diverse route options for vehicles, so that traffic can be
diverted to different routes, thus mitigating traffic congestion.
Furthermore, in these optimal results (marked by red boxes
in Fig. 11), 10 are the initial results of our method, and
10 are from the alternative results, indicating the importance

Fig. 12. Route planning efficiency comparison of our method and Dijkstra
on (a) normal and (b) simplified road networks.

of the alternative results. The alternative routes with similar
travel times complement the initial result of our method and
guarantee to find the optimal result.
2) Model Efficiency: We compared the route planning efficiency of our method and optimized Dijkstra in the ArcGIS
NA module. The performance of the built-in Dijkstra is
further improved by using better data structures such as
d-heaps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: URBAN MULTIPLE ROUTE PLANNING MODEL USING DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

Fig. 13.

8045

Comparison of the results of our method and the Dijkstra algorithm under scenarios 1, 6 and 20.

Fig. 12 shows that our method can deal with two different
road network densities with high efficiency. Specifically, under
the simplified road network, our method takes only 513 ms on
average to output four routes, that is, 131 ms per route, which
is even better than ArcGIS NA (480 ms per route). Under the
normal road network, our method takes 3685 ms on average to
plan four routes, that is, 921 ms per route. Although this result
is worse than that of Dijkstra, the time cost (less than 1 s) is
still acceptable in a real-world application. At the same time,
note that the tested Dijkstra is equipped with a well-designed
data structure, but our method does not use any data structure
optimization. In conclusion, this result indicates that with the
increasing road network density, the time cost of our model
also increases significantly. However, regardless of how dense
the road network is, our model can meet the response time
requirements of drivers in real-world applications and has
promising application value.

V. C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we proposed a multi-route DP model to solve
the route planning problem and demonstrated its ability to
find the optimal policy that can plan a vehicle route with the
shortest travel time while using only limited information as
input. We can draw some conclusions concerning the proposed
method.
First, by introducing the distance contribution index, DC I ,
into the reward function, our method ensures that the
agent can choose a better action and avoids unnecessary
detours.
Second, our method yields not only an optimal path but
also the driving policy at each intersection. This policy can
provide several comparable alternatives to the optimal route
for vehicles, so that traffic can be diverted to different routes,
thus mitigating the congestion drift problem. Note that all the
methods mentioned in the Introduction section output only one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 7, JULY 2022

TABLE VIII
S CENARIOS FOR MODEL EFFICIENCY TEST

A PPENDIX II
See Table VIII.
R EFERENCES

planning route, which tends to result in the congestion drift
problem and thus aggregate congestion.
Third, all of the experimental results show that our model
can be applied in a city-scale road network with high
efficiency. Note that it is difficult for model-free RL methods
(Q-learning, etc.) to achieve high efficiency in such a large
road environment because they need a long learning time
to explore the whole road network structure. However, such
explorations are not necessary since, normally, the road
networks in the real world do not change frequently.
However, some limitations should be noted. To achieve high
efficiency, our method requires modelling the environment
(including road network structure modelling and state transfer
probability design) in advance, which puts some restrictions
on the practical application of our method.
In the future, more complicated route planning objectives,
such as user equilibrium and system optimum, can be taken
into account. Due to the intelligent nature of RL methods,
our method has great potential to solve this kind of problem.
Furthermore, based on this paper, future research directions
include considering more realistic road network models and
further improving the model efficiency of our method under
a greater road network density. Although we considered the
whole road network in Shenzhen city, some details were
ignored. For instance, the viaduct was not taken into account
in this paper. A more realistic road environment needs to be
described in the future so that a more accurate travel time
can be estimated. In addition, the model efficiency of our
method is sensitive to the road network density. If the scale of
the road network environment is further expanded, the time
cost for path planning will be further increased, which may
not meet the user’s requirements for the algorithm response
time. Therefore, in future research, the algorithm needs to be
further improved to reduce its sensitivity to the complexity
of the road network.
A PPENDIX I
See Figure 13.

[1] E. Walraven, M. T. J. Spaan, and B. Bakker, “Traffic flow optimization:
A reinforcement learning approach,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 52,
pp. 203–212, Jun. 2016.
[2] Y. Wang et al., “Analysing the spatial configuration of urban bus
networks based on the geospatial network analysis method,” Cities,
vol. 96, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 102406, doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2019.102406.
[3] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
Numerische Math., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 269–271, Dec. 1959.
[4] R. W. Floyd, “Algorithm 97: Shortest path,” Commun. ACM, vol. 5,
no. 6, p. 345, Jun. 1962.
[5] N. V. Karadimas, M. Kolokathi, G. Defteraiou, and V. Loumos, “Ant
colony system vs ArcGIS network analyst: The case of municipal solid
waste collection,” in Proc. 5th WSEAS Int. Conf. Environ., Ecosyst.
Develop., 2007, pp. 34–128.
[6] P. Hart, N. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Sci. Cybern.,
vol. SSC-4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, Oct. 1968.
[7] A. Stentz, “Optimal and efficient path planning for partially known
environments,” in Intelligent Unmanned Ground Vehicles. San Diego,
CA, USA: Springer, 1997, pp. 203–220.
[8] S. Koenig and M. Likhachev, “D* lite,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 15, 2002,
pp. 476–483.
[9] M. Dorigo and G. Di Caro, “Ant colony optimization: A new metaheuristic,” in Proc. Congr. Evol. Comput. (CEC), vol. 2, Jul. 1999,
pp. 1470–1477.
[10] M. Dorigo, G. D. Caro, and L. M. Gambardella, “Ant algorithms for
discrete optimization,” Artif. Life, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 137–172, Apr. 1999.
[11] A. L. C. Bazzan and R. Grunitzki, “A multiagent reinforcement learning
approach to en-route trip building,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.
(IJCNN), Jul. 2016, pp. 5288–5295.
[12] M. Z. Arokhlo, A. Selamat, S. Z. M. Hashim, and M. H. Selamat, “Route
guidance system using multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 7th
Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Asia, Jul. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[13] S. S. Koh, B. Zhou, P. Yang, Z. Yang, H. Fang, and J. Feng, “Reinforcement learning for vehicle route optimization in SUMO,” in Proc.
IEEE 20th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun., Jun. 2018,
pp. 1468–1473.
[14] M. P. Deisenroth, G. Neumann, and J. Peters, “A survey on policy search
for robotics,” Found. Trends Robot., vol. 2, nos. 1–2, pp. 388–403, 2013.
[15] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2018.
[16] R. Arnott, A. de Palma, and R. Lindsey, “Does providing information to
drivers reduce traffic congestion?” Transp. Res. A, Gen., vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 309–318, Sep. 1991.
[17] H. Yang and H.-J. Huang, “The multi-class, multi-criteria traffic network
equilibrium and systems optimum problem,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol.,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Jan. 2004.
[18] W. Zeng and R. L. Church, “Finding shortest paths on real road
networks: The case for A,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. Sci., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 531–543, Apr. 2009.
[19] M. Dorigo and C. Blum, “Ant colony optimization theory: A survey,”
Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 344, nos. 2–3, pp. 243–278, Nov. 2005.
[20] W. Chen, Z. Duan, Z. Zhou, and J. Song, “Road traffic performance
index algorithm and application based on travel time,” Fuzhou, Fujian,
China, Tech. Rep., 2012, pp. 1722–1730.
[21] Y. Wen et al., “Mapping dynamic road emissions for a megacity by
using open-access traffic congestion index data,” Appl. Energy, vol. 260,
Feb. 2020, Art. no. 114357.
[22] O. Marom and B. Rosman, “Belief reward shaping in reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Apr. 2018, vol. 32, no. 1,
pp. 3762–3769, Art. no. 1. Accessed: Apr. 19, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11741
[23] M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling, “The arcade
learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents,”
J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 47, pp. 253–279, Jun. 2013.
[24] Y. Xi, Q. Du, B. He, F. Ren, Y. Zhang, and X. Ye, “The dynamic
optimization of the departure times of metro users during rush hour in
an agent-based simulation: A case study in Shenzhen, China,” Appl. Sci.,
vol. 7, no. 11, p. 1102, Oct. 2017, doi: 10.3390/app7111102.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: URBAN MULTIPLE ROUTE PLANNING MODEL USING DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING

[25] C. Sun, H. M. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Road traffic operation assessment
based on multi-source floating car data fusion,” Tongji Daxue Xuebao J.
Tongji Univ., vol. 46, pp. 46–52, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.11908/j.issn.0253374x.2018.01.007.
[26] H. Karimipour, V. W. Y. Tam, H. Burnie, and K. N. Le, “Vehicle routing
optimization for improving fleet fuel efficiency: A case study in Sydney,
Australia,” Int. J. Environ. Sci. Dev., vol. 4, pp. 776–780, Oct. 2017, doi:
10.18178/ijesd.2017.8.11.1056.
[27] N. V. Karadimas, M. Kolokathi, G. Defteraiou, and V. Loumos, “Municipal waste collection of large items optimized with ArcGis network
analyst,” in Proc. ECMS, I. Zelinka, Z. Oplatkova, and A. Orsoni, Eds.,
Jun. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[28] K. A. Eldrandaly and A. F. Abdallah, “A novel GIS-based decisionmaking framework for the school bus routing problem,” Geo-Spatial
Inf. Sci., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 51–59, Mar. 2012.
[29] V. Sanjeevi and P. Shahabudeen, “Optimal routing for efficient municipal
solid waste transportation by using ArcGIS application in Chennai,
India,” Waste Manag. Res., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 11–21, Jan. 2016, doi:
10.1177/0734242X15607430.

Ningyezi Peng received the B.S. degree in geographic information system and the M.S. degree
in cartography and geographic information system
from Wuhan University, China, in 2017 and 2020,
respectively. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Land Surveying
and Geo-Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong. Her major research interests
include route planning, urban spatial analysis, and
spatial epidemiology.

Yuliang Xi received the B.S. degree in geography
from Anhui Normal University, China, in 2012,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in cartography and
geographical information system from the School of
Resource and Environmental Sciences, Wuhan University, China, in 2015 and 2020, respectively. He is
currently a Lecturer with the School of Internet,
Anhui University, China. His research focuses on big
data analysis and mining, intelligent transportation,
including route planning, and multi-agent simulation
in commuting.

8047

Jinmeng Rao received the B.S. degree in geographic information system and the M.S. degree
in cartography and geographic information system
from Wuhan University, China, in 2016 and 2019,
respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in geography with the Geospatial Data Science Laboratory, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
USA, with a focus on cartography and geographic
information system. His research interests include
geospatial artificial intelligence, privacy-preserving
machine learning, computer vision, and trajectory
data mining.

Xiangyuan Ma received the B.S. degree from the
Department of Geography, Central China Normal
University, in 2013, and the M.S. degree from
the Department of Geographic Information Science,
Central China Normal University, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cartography and
geographic information science with Wuhan University, China. His major research interests include
reinforcement learning and ITS, semantic segmentation and urban environment representation, and
geovisualization.

Fu
Ren
received the B.S. degree in
computer-assisted cartography and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in cartography and geographic
information system from Wuhan University, China,
in 1999, 2002, and 2006, respectively. He is
currently a Professor of cartography and the
Department Chair of GIS and cartography with
Wuhan University. He is also the Vice Director
of commission on cartography and geographic
information system with The Geographical
Society of China. He has published more than
100 peer-reviewed scientific articles in the area of theoretical cartography
and GIScience and technology. His research interests include online thematic
cartography, geographical information services, and spatial information
visualization, which is applied in mapping, land, agriculture, and ocean.
He has been the PI for four nation-level projects and received six national
and ministerial scientific awards.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 00:28:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

