Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Transportation Research Part C
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trc

Real-time system optimal traffic routing under uncertainties — Can
physics models boost reinforcement learning?
Zemian Ke a , Qiling Zou a , Jiachao Liu a , Sean Qian a,b
a
b

,∗

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
System optimum
Traffic operation
Reinforcement learning
Demand uncertainty
Model reliability

ABSTRACT
System optimal traffic routing can mitigate congestion by assigning routes for a portion of
vehicles so that the total travel time of all vehicles in the transportation system can be
reduced. However, achieving real-time optimal routing poses challenges due to uncertain
demands and unknown system dynamics, particularly in expansive transportation networks.
While physics model-based methods are sensitive to uncertainties and model mismatches,
model-free reinforcement learning struggles with learning inefficiencies and interpretability
issues. Our paper presents TransRL, a novel algorithm that integrates reinforcement learning
with physics models for enhanced performance, reliability, and interpretability. TransRL begins
by establishing a deterministic policy grounded in physics models, from which it learns from
and is guided by a differentiable and stochastic teacher policy. During training, TransRL aims to
maximize cumulative rewards while minimizing the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between
the current policy and the teacher policy. This approach enables TransRL to simultaneously
leverage interactions with the environment and insights from physics models. We conduct
experiments on three transportation networks with up to hundreds of links. The results
demonstrate TransRL’s superiority over traffic model-based methods for being adaptive and
learning from the actual network data. By leveraging the information from physics models,
TransRL consistently outperforms state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms such as
proximal policy optimization (PPO) and soft actor-critic (SAC). Moreover, TransRL’s actions
exhibit higher reliability and interpretability compared to baseline reinforcement learning
approaches like PPO and SAC.

1. Introduction
Traffic congestion in urban areas is one of the plagues of citizen’s everyday life and it can cost huge economic loss (Jayasooriya
and Bandara, 2017). According to a report from Federal Highway Administration1 (FHWA), ‘‘roughly half of the congestion
experienced by Americans happens virtually every day’’. This type of congestion is generated by unbalanced temporal and spatial
distribution of traffic activities. Recent studies (Chen et al., 2020; Ke and Qian, 2023) have shown that congestion can be significantly
mitigated by optimally guiding route choices of a small portion of travelers. The system optimal routing aims to minimize the total
system cost by assigning routes for some travelers. There are many ways to practically implement and guide traffic routing. For
instance, congestion toll (Yang and Meng, 1998; Chen et al., 2018) changes users’ routing choice by changing their perceived

∗ Correspondence to: 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
1

E-mail address: seanqian@cmu.edu (S. Qian).
https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/aboutus/opstory.htm

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2025.105040
Received 9 July 2024; Received in revised form 4 January 2025; Accepted 3 February 2025
Available online 17 February 2025
0968-090X/© 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

cost. Variable traffic signs (VMS) provide real-time traffic information using road-side signals like LED signs (Emmerink et al.,
1996; Erke et al., 2007; Arnott et al., 1991; Jacob and Abdulhai, 2006) to affects users’ routing choice. Route guidance and driver
information systems (RGDIS) (Adler and Blue, 2002) directly provide route recommendations to users using in-vehicle devices such
as infoentertainment system or cell phone applications. However, solving system-level optimal routing in real-time for large networks
remains a big challenge.
The optimal routing in real-time for large networks is challenging for three reasons. First, demands are uncertain. Predicting
travel demand with 100% accuracy is almost impossible due to the inherent uncertainty and complexity of human behavior, external
factors, and system dynamics. Demands essentially affect traffic conditions, and the difference between the actual demands and the
estimated demands can cause nontrivial estimation errors in traffic conditions. For example, Qian and Zhang (2011) showed that
congestion duration can change significantly with an incremental change in demands. Therefore, it is important to consider the
demand uncertainties. From a theoretical perspective, Waller et al. (2001) showed that using expected demands tends to overestimate
the network performance in traffic assignment evaluation. Do Chung et al. (2012) also stated it is important to consider demand
uncertainty for the congestion pricing problems. In this study, we explicitly include the demand uncertainty and regard demands
as random variables whose exact values cannot be predicted with 100% accuracy.
Second, system dynamics may not be modeled perfectly. Though extensive traffic flow models (e.g., the celebrated LWR
model Lighthill and Whitham, 1955; Richards, 1956, cell transmission models Daganzo, 1994, 1995, and link queue model Jin,
2021) have been proposed to approximate the system dynamics of transportation networks, no known flow model can precisely
replicate the flow in networks consisting of both roads and intersections. Each model is associated with various assumptions and
possible parameter estimation errors. For example, conventional kinematic models (Lighthill and Whitham, 1955; Richards, 1956;
Daganzo, 1994, 1995; Jin, 2021) all assume a deterministic fundamental diagram to depict the relation between density and flow
for mathematical tractability, while (Qu et al., 2017) states this relation can be better modeled by stochastic models. In addition,
estimation of the deterministic fundamental diagram parameters is not always accurate due to the randomness of traffic flow and
transient flow state transitions. In this study, we acknowledge that the traffic flow model cannot be known precisely. Rather, there is
a model mismatch between the assumed/adopted traffic models and the actual true system dynamics, and this mismatch is unknown
in advance.
Third, real-time system optimal traffic routing is challenging especially in large networks due to complex interplay among traffic
flow of various origins and destinations. Pi and Qian (2017) proposed a stochastic optimal real-time routing method for a tworoute network. By abstracting a general commuting network into a two-route network, the analytical solution can be derived and
approximated using dynamic programming. However, this analytical solution method is not suitable for a large network because the
complexity of the problem and the dimension of decision variables increase exponentially as the network size. Alternatively, machine
learning methods, like reinforcement learning, could provide an approximate solution by learning from data. Nevertheless, the state
space and action space increase exponentially as the network size increases, so finding an optimal policy from the exploded search
space without any prior knowledge is inefficient and sometimes even infeasible. To our best knowledge, though (Lazar et al., 2021)
leveraged reinforcement learning to solve real-time optimal routing on networks with up to 41 links. Real-time optimal routing has
not been solved by reinforcement learning on networks with more than hundreds of links. This study experiments on three networks
with 2 links, 18 links, and 621 links, respectively.
Existing methods for real-time optimal routing or general traffic control can be categorized into heuristic methods, model-based
methods, and reinforcement learning-based methods. Heuristic methods use rule-of-thumb or feedback control to correct control
errors to maintain desired system states. Kachroo and Özbay (1998) formulated the real-time routing problem as a feedback control
problem, and a feedback linearization technique is used to achieve a user equilibrium state. Paz and Peeta (2009) adopted a fuzzy
control approach to determine real-time routing strategies to improve the network performance. Heuristic methods are interpretable
and easy to implement, but they are reactive and only take action when control errors arise. Therefore, their performance is almost
necessarily suboptimal.
Model-based methods typically first develop a traffic model or simulation using field data to simulate the system dynamics, and
then solve the optimal solutions through either heuristic algorithms (e.g., moving successive averages (MSA)) or deriving analytical
closed-form solutions. For example, Toledo et al. (2015) used autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) to predict demands,
a binary logit model to predict traveler choices, and CTM to predict traffic flows. Based on these predictions, an optimization
algorithm was adopted to set tolls to affect routing choices to optimize the objective function. Tan and Gao (2018) proposed a
model predictive control method for dynamic pricing to reduce the total traveler delay. Similar to Toledo et al. (2015), Tan and
Gao (2018) used a logit choice model to predict traveler choices and CTM to predict traffic flows. Model-based methods are reliable
and interpretable, and sometimes can be proven to be optimal in theory. However, the inevitable model mismatch between the
models and the actual system dynamics intrigues their performances in practice.
Reinforcement learning (RL) gained popularity in the traffic control domain because it is model-free and can learn optimal
policies directly from data or the environment. Pandey et al. (2020) considered a practical control scenario with multiple origins
and destinations, partially observed network states, and stochastic demands. The problem was formulated as a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) and solved using RL. The experiments in Pandey et al. (2020) showed RL outperformed feedback
control. Lazar et al. (2021) considered a scenario where route choices of autonomous vehicles can be fully controlled to improve
network efficiency, and the policy was learned using reinforcement learning. The experiments on simplified networks indicated the
learned RL policy realized performances on par with the system optimum. However, to our best knowledge, RL has not been tested
for optimal routing on large networks with more than hundreds of links. With the well-known curse of dimensionality, whether RL
can solve optimal policies in large networks remains unknown.
2

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

In this study, the reliability and interpretability of the RL policies are the focus for its realism in real-world traffic operation
practice. Most RL policies are not deterministic and the traffic environment is stochastic in nature, and it is clear that the
performances of RL policies in practice are subject to variability. When implementing RL policies, one question out of interest
is how poor the performance of RL policies can possibly be in the worst cases. In reality, traffic operation may not tolerate a
poor performance for just one day, unlike RL applications in other domains, e.g. robotics, that may accept some time of online
improvement through learning. In this work, we propose Conditional Travel Time Reduction at Risk (CTTRaR) to measure the
reliability of a control method. CTTRaR compares the total travel time of the worst cases with a control method and the total travel
time of the no-control scenarios. RL policies are regarded as reliable if the worst performance is still better than the no-control
scenarios. In addition, the interpretability of the RL policies is a concern for practitioners. The objective of RL is to maximize the
cumulative rewards with no specific constraints for the output actions. As a result, though RL leads to high cumulative rewards, the
actions of RL might fluctuate over time, which makes RL policies less interpretable. Our general idea is to constrain the RL policies
to not go too far from an interpretable ‘‘teacher’’ policy. For example, system optimum routing under traffic flow dynamics models
can serve as a teacher policy. Those flow dynamics models may not be precisely calibrated (e.g., in a simulation environment) or
the demand is stochastic, but its flow propagation mechanisms and the analytical solution can help to guide and learn interpretable
RL policies.
Moreover, it is unclear when RL is superior to model-based methods and vice versa. A model-based method is extensively
compared with model-free RL methods to shed light on the performance between model-based methods and learning-based methods.
The results indicate RLs outperform the model-based method when the demand uncertainty is large or/and the model mismatch is
significant, and vice versa. When the network size is large, RLs sometimes struggle to find a reasonable policy that works precisely
for the unknown or unexplored system states and dynamics, but model-based can perform well especially when the model mismatch
is insignificant. With the trade-off between the model-based method and model-free RL, one interesting question is can we combine
the advantages of both types of methods?
We propose a general reinforcement learning framework that can couple different types of well-established transportation
methods (e.g., heuristics, model-based, or machine learning-based) with RL. For example, the proposed framework can be leveraged
to signal control problems, and theoretical control methods, such as max pressure control, can serve as a teacher policy. One can
also apply the proposed framework to ramp metering problems, where the classic heuristic control method ALINEA can work as a
teacher policy. In this study, we focus on an example of coupling the model-based method with RL. Our proposed reinforcement
learning framework differentiates from most previous reinforcement learning algorithms including DDPG (Schulman et al., 2017),
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) by leveraging information from transportation methods, named
Transportation-informed Reinforcement Learning (TransRL). TransRL is able to learn from the environment and the traffic model
simultaneously. On one hand, even with a model mismatch, the information from the models is not unuseful and can help RL narrow
down the search space. On the other hand, with the ability to learn from the environment directly, RL is able to learn a better policy
than the model-based method by implicitly correcting the model mismatch between the models and the actual system dynamics.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We solve real-time system optimal routing in sizable transportation networks. The problem complexity grows exponentially
as the network size increases. To our best knowledge, while (Lazar et al., 2021) solved real-time optimal routing on networks
with up to 41 links, this study experiments on networks with up to 621 links.
• To reflect the realistic practice, we relax the assumptions of known travel demands and accurate traffic models in previous
studies (for example, Muñoz and Laval (2006) assumes known demands and Pi and Qian (2017) assumes accurate traffic
models). Instead, we assume that travel demands follow a time-dependent Gaussian distribution with means of historical
average demands. Moreover, there are model mismatches between the accessible traffic models and the online test (unknown
and true) system dynamics, which stem from lack of knowledge, model estimation errors, or unexpected incidents in real
world.
• Model-free RLs are compared with a traffic model-based method under various levels of model mismatches. In literature,
model-free RLs have been compared with simple feedback control (e.g., Pandey et al., 2020), but not with traffic model-based
methods. This comparison provides insights into when a traffic model-based method is superior and when RLs are preferable.
• Ultimately, we proposed a novel RL framework TransRL that combines RL with traffic models. With the ability to learn from the
environment and traffic models simultaneously, TransRL learns more efficiently than model-free RLs and is more adaptive than
the traffic model-based method. More importantly, the actions of TransRL are more reliable and interpretable than model-free
RLs.
• Reliability and interpretability of TransRL are the focus. In order to use TransRL in practice, its performance at any stage
throughout the process of online learning cannot go below the network performance without any traffic control/management
measures. TransRL’s policies are also designed to ensure they approximately follow the guidance of model-based optimal flow
solutions, which ensure its interpretability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Literature related to vehicle routing and RL-based control methods is discussed
in Section 2. In Section 3, we introduce our framework TransRL and show it can be proved to converge under conditions of finite
discrete state and action space. We subsequently elaborate on how TransRL can be trained in continuous state space and action
space by using neural networks to approximate value functions and policies. The problem formulation of the real-time optimal
routing problems is included in Section 4. Section 4 then presents how to solve the optimal routing problems using a model-based
method, model-free RL, and the proposed TransRL. The considered methods are compared with various experiment settings on three
networks in Section 5. Section 6 concludes our findings and suggests potential directions for future work.
3

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

2. Related works
Quite a few literatures investigated providing real-time route information to travelers through variable message signs (e.g., Messmer
et al., 1998; Wunderlich et al., 2000), and in-vehicle routing mechanisms (Aerde and Case, 1988). However, assigning routes or
providing route information to improve the network performance is less studied. Adler et al. (2005) used cooperative distributed
multi-agent systems to explore the interactions between route information providers and travelers, and it was found that negotiation
between information providers and travelers can improve the network performance. Paz and Peeta (2009) studied affecting traveler
routing behaviors via providing real-time routing information, and a fuzzy control approach was proposed to determine the
information strategy in order to enhance the network performance. Du et al. (2015) proposed a coordinated online in-vehicle routing
scheme with intentional information provision perturbation (CRM-IP), which leverages the bounded rationality of travelers to shape
traveler routing behaviors so that the system optimality and user optimality are balanced. Lazar et al. (2021) studied a scenario
where route choices of autonomous vehicles can be fully controlled in a centralized manner to improve network performance. The
policy learned by RL performed close to a theoretically optimal solution in networks composed of up to dozens of links.
In the general traffic control domain, various analytical methods have been proposed, such as dynamic programming for optimal
routing on a 2-route network (Pi and Qian, 2017), max-pressure for signal control (Xu et al., 2022, 2024; Xu, 2023), and feedback
control for ramp metering (Wang et al., 2001; Zhao et al., 2020), to name a few. The analytical methods develop control policies
through mathematical derivations on the top of model assumptions. These derived control policies often show desirable properties,
such as convergence guarantee (i.e., reliability) and interoperability. However, real environments may change over time. Because
of a lack of learning ability, these control policies cannot automatically adapt to changing environments, which deteriorates control
performances.
Recently, reinforcement learning has gained popularity because of the capability of steering large language models towards
human preferences or downstream tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). In
transportation research community, reinforcement learning algorithms are widely used in solving real-time control problems because
of the characteristics of being model-free and learnable while capable of taking proactive optimal actions even in uncertain
environments (Haydari and Yilmaz, 2022; Parvez Farazi et al., 2021). Specifically, RL algorithms have been applied to various traffic
control problems, including vehicle routing (Kullman et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2019), autonomous driving (Ye et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2018), traffic signal control (Prashanth and Bhatnagar, 2010; Li et al., 2021), ramp metering (Yang et al., 2019), variable speed limit
control (Ke et al., 2020), and congestion pricing (Pandey et al., 2020). RL used in transportation can be categorized into model-free
RL (e.g., Li et al., 2021; Haydari and Yilmaz, 2022) and RL with prior knowledge (e.g., Ke et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022a,b; Chen
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022). Model-free RL learns from scratch by interacting with the environment, so the RL agent explores the
search space by mostly taking random actions during the early stage of the training. As a consequence, the performance of modelfree RL is not guaranteed and is even worse than the non-control case before the convergence. This is particularly problematic
in the traffic operation domain, because any traffic management measure cannot afford to under-perform under general public’s
expectation, even for just a few days. In other words, practically it would be impossible to take a number of days before RL starts
to show system benefits. Our paper can help address this issue by guiding RL online learning with policies derived from physics
models.
Compared with model-free RL, RL with prior knowledge is more data-efficient by utilizing prior knowledge to narrow down the
search space or start with a policy better than random initialization. Ke et al. (2020) utilized transfer learning to transfer a policy
trained on a source scenario to multiple target scenarios. Though the fundamental diagrams in the target scenarios differed from
those in the source scenario, the transfer learning significantly shortened the training process in the target scenarios. Han et al.
(2022a,b) augmented field data using traffic flow models. From the augmented data, RL was trained offline, and then the learned
policies were implemented to acquire new field data. This process repeated such that RL kept learning from the environment. Bai
et al. (2022) designed a hybrid reinforcement learning framework that combines a rule-based strategy and reinforcement learning
to optimize the eco-driving strategy. Most of the time, the vehicle is controlled by RL policies. When the stop warning is activated,
the rule-based strategy will take control and ensure the vehicle stops safely. Chen et al. (2022) proposed an RL-based framework
for end-to-end autonomous driving. While learning to behave optimally, the proposed framework also learns a latent environment
model that predicts the state of the environment in a low-dimensional latent space. The latent model greatly reduces the sample
complexity by learning the latent states of the high-dimensional observations. Though RL has been extensively studied in engineering
problems (e.g., Liu et al., 2020a,b, 2023), the actions of RL policies are not constrained to improve the reliability and interpretability
of the RL policies.
Our proposed TransRL leverages information from traffic models by learning from a teacher policy derived using these models.
This approach aligns with studies employing imitation learning, which aims to train a policy that replicates the behavior of a
teacher policy. The imitation learning loss is defined as the difference between the teacher policy and the learned policy. However,
imitation learning may falter if the teacher policy is suboptimal. Therefore, recent studies combined the imitation learning loss and
task rewards from environment. For instance, Weihs et al. (2021) introduced an algorithm that begins with imitation learning and
later incorporates task rewards. Initially, the policy is trained solely using imitation learning loss. Then, for each state, the action of
the learned policy is compared with the teacher policy. For states where the two policies diverge, reliance on the teacher policy is
reduced, and greater weight is given to task rewards. Similarly, Nguyen et al. (2022) combined teacher guidance with task rewards,
maintaining a fixed distance between the learned and teacher policies. However, determining the appropriate level of similarity
between the two policies is challenging and may vary across environments. Walsman et al. (2022) proposed a reward shaping
approach to mitigate the limitations of imitation learning. Their method first computes a value function from the teacher policy.
4

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

The reshaped reward then combines the task reward with adjustments from the value function, guiding the RL agent towards states
favored by the teacher policy. More recently, Shenfeld et al. (2023) introduced teacher-guided reinforcement learning (TGRL), which
combines imitation learning loss with cumulative task rewards. In TGRL, the parameter balancing imitation loss and task rewards
is tuned by comparing the learned policy with an auxiliary policy trained solely on task rewards. Compared with these studies,
TransRL offers several distinctive features. First, TransRL employs KL divergence instead of Shannon entropy (as used in Shenfeld
et al., 2023) to measure the difference between the learned policy and the teacher policy. The use of KL divergence provides a
convergence guarantee under certain conditions, as demonstrated in the next section. Moreover, TransRL maintains a constant
coefficient for the KL divergence, ensuring the learned policy does not deviate too far from the teacher policy. This preserves the
reliability and interpretability of the teacher policy. Finally, TransRL derives a stochastic teacher policy from a deterministic traffic
model-based policy, with tunable stochasticity to adjust the reliance on the model-based policy. When the traffic model is highly
predictive, the stochasticity is kept low, and otherwise it is increased.
3. TransRL
3.1. Preliminaries for RL
The problem studied in RL can be formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). The state space and the action space are
denoted as  and . After applying an action 𝑎𝑡 ∈  at current state 𝑠𝑡 ∈ , the next state 𝑠𝑡+1 ∈  of the environment is
determined by a state transition probability function 𝑝(𝑠𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), and a reward 𝑟𝑡 is produced by the environment. The return is
∑
the discounted sum of rewards in the whole horizon 𝑡 𝛾 𝑡 𝑟𝑡 , where 𝛾 is a discount factor making a trade-off between short-term
rewards and long-term rewards. A policy 𝜋(𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) determines the probability distribution of actions 𝑎𝑡 given a state 𝑠𝑡 . We denote
state–action marginals induced by a policy 𝜋(𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) as 𝜌𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ).
The objective of reinforcement learning is to find an optimal policy 𝜋 ∗ such that the expected return is maximized.
[
]
∑
∗
𝑡
𝜋 = ar g max E(𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )∼𝜌𝜋
𝛾 𝑟𝑡
(1)
𝜋

𝑡

This study focuses on actor-critic methods (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2015), which are a combination of Qlearning (Watkins, 1989) and policy optimization. Generally, actor-critic methods use a critic network parameterized as 𝜃 to estimate
the expected return of state–action pairs with a policy 𝜋 (i.e., Q-values 𝑄𝜋𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )), and an actor network parameterized as 𝜙 to output
actions given states (i.e., 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )).
Both the actor network and the critic network are trained using data from an experience replay buffer containing transitions
(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑟𝑡 ). The actor network 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) is updated by gradient descent with a loss function based on Q-values.
[
]
𝐽𝜋 (𝜙) = E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝜙 −𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )
(2)
The critic network is updated by the temporal difference error based on the Bellman equation, and the loss function for the critic
network is given by
) ]2
[
(
(3)
𝐽𝑄 (𝜃) = 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − (𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑄𝜃̄ (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎𝑡+1 ) ) , 𝑎𝑡+1 ∼ 𝜋𝜙̄ (𝑠𝑡+1 )
where 𝑄𝜃̄ and 𝜋𝜙̄ are a target critic network and a target actor network respectively, which are used to stabilize the training. The
actor and critic networks are updated at every learning step, while the target actor and critic networks are updated periodically by
copying the weights of the actor and critic networks respectively.
3.2. TransRL models
Our proposed reinforcement learning framework differentiates from most previous reinforcement learning algorithms
(e.g., DDPG Schulman et al., 2017, PPO Schulman et al., 2017, and SAC Haarnoja et al., 2018) by leveraging information from
transportation methods, named Transportation-informed Reinforcement Learning (TransRL). First, a neural network is used to learn
a stochastic and differentiable teacher policy from a well-established transportation method. Then, during the training or testing
of TransRL, aside from interactions with the environment, TransRL also learns from the teacher policy by comparing the current
policy with the teacher policy. The divergence between the two policies, combined with rewards, is passed to TransRL for learning.
The whole process is illustrated in Fig. 1.
3.2.1. Teacher policy
We assume there exist well-established transportation models and methods that can output actions. The choice of transportation
domain models can be very flexible, and it can be traffic model-based, heuristics, or rule-based methods. Compared with general
learning-based methods, which work like a black box, transportation domain models are more reliable and interpretable as they
incorporate domain knowledge and physics information that would guide the RL agent to learn effectively.
Then, we develop a stochastic and differentiable teacher policy based on a transportation domain model. The teacher policy is
a probability distribution for actions given a state. The action distribution concentrates on the action output by the transportation
domain model. The concentration level of the distribution can be tuned by an unreliability parameter 𝜎. Fig. 2 shows a simple case
with an action dimension of 1 and the range of action is [0, 1] where the action represents the portion of vehicles to be diverted from
5

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 1. TransRL concept diagram.

Fig. 2. The teacher policy.

the most preferred route. As Fig. 2 shows, a smaller unreliability parameter leads to a distribution more concentrated on the action
from the deterministic transportation domain model. Essentially, the teacher policy is a prior distribution of actions for states. We
will provide an example of a teacher policy in the later Section 4.3.
The benefits of making the teacher policy stochastic and differentiable are two-fold. First, the unreliability parameter enables
tuning how much the TransRL agent relies on the transportation domain model. Besides, a differentiable teacher policy enables
gradient propagation, which makes possible the TransRL learning from the teacher policy.
The exploration and exploitation balance during training is also tuned by the teacher policy. A larger unreliability parameter
promotes exploration by flattening the action distribution, while a smaller value emphasizes exploitation by concentrating around
the action from the transportation method. This dynamic mechanism allows TransRL to adapt its behavior between exploiting the
transportation method and exploring the environment.
3.2.2. The augmented objective function
To enable TransRL’s learning from the teacher policy, the objective of TransRL is to maximize the cumulative rewards while
minimizing the differences between the divergence between the learned policy and the teacher policy. Therefore, the objective
function of TransRL is different from the objective function of most previous reinforcement learning algorithms as Eq. (1) shows.
This novel objective fundamentally changes the exploration behaviors and the learning process of the reinforcement learning agent.
Specifically, the objective function of TransRL is given by
[
]
∑ (
(
))
𝐽 (𝜋) = E(𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )∼𝜌𝜋
𝛾 𝑡 𝑟𝑡 − 𝛼 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )∥𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )
(4)
𝑡

where 𝛼 is the temperature parameter that makes a trade-off between the reward and the divergence term. We adopt the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. Then, the augmented objective becomes
[
]
∑ (
(
))
𝑡
𝐽 (𝜋) = E(𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )∼𝜌𝜋
𝛾 𝑟𝑡 − 𝛼 𝐷𝐾 𝐿 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )∥𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )
(5)
𝑡

6

Z. Ke et al.

[
= E(𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )∼𝜌𝜋

∑

(
[
])
(
)
𝛾 𝑡 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛼 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝛼E𝑎∼𝜋(⋅∣𝑠𝑡 ) log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )

]

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

(6)

𝑡

Shannon cross entropy is also widely used to measure the difference( between
) policies (e.g., Shenfeld et al., 2023). If the Shannon
cross entropy is adopted in the objective function (5), the entropy  𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) term in Eq. (6) will be removed. This is not desirable
given the assumption that the teacher policy is suboptimal and the RL agent is encouraged to explore.
Theorem 1. The maximum entropy reinforcement learning SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) is equivalent to TransRL with a teacher policy of
uniform distribution.
[
]
Proof. If 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 is a uniform distribution, 𝜋𝑇 𝐶[ (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) is a constant
regardless of 𝑎, so E𝑎∼𝜋(⋅∣𝑠𝑡 ) log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) is also a constant regardless
]
of 𝜋. As a result, we can remove E𝑎∼𝜋(⋅∣𝑠𝑡 ) log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) from the objective function (6), and then it becomes
]
[
∑ (
(
))
𝛾 𝑡 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛼 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )
(7)
𝐽 (𝜋) = E(𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 )∼𝜌𝜋
𝑡

which is the objective of SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018).

□

Remark 1. Including the KL divergence term in the objective results that TransRL becomes more reliable and interpretable than
classical RL. With this divergence constraint, the policy 𝜋 does not go too far away from the teacher policy 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 that is assumed to
be reliable and interpretable.
3.2.3. Policy iteration
The optimal policy is solved using policy iteration. The policy iteration includes, (1) the policy evaluation step where the value
functions are estimated given a policy, and (2) the policy improvement step where the policy is updated to increase the values given
the value functions. By repeating the policy evaluation and the policy improvement, the policy is guaranteed to converge to one of
the optimal policies that maximize values.
TransRL uses auxiliary Q-values according to the augmented objective function such that maximizing auxiliary Q-values is
equivalent to maximizing the augmented objective. The auxiliary Q-values are given by
[
]
𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝 𝑉 (𝑠𝑡+1 )
(8)
where

]
[
𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )
𝑉 (𝑠𝑡+1 ) = E𝑎𝑡+1 ∼𝜋 𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎𝑡+1 ) + 𝛼 log
𝜋(𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )

(9)

is the auxiliary state value.
For the policy evaluation, The auxiliary Q-values are updated iteratively by a modified Bellman equation
[
]
𝑄𝑘+1 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ← 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝 𝑉 𝑘 (𝑠𝑡+1 )

(10)

With the above update rule, the auxiliary Q-values can be proved to converge to the unique auxiliary Q-values of the policy 𝜋 as
follows.
Lemma 1 (Policy Evaluation Convergence). Starting with a initial auxiliary Q-values function 𝑄0 ∶  ×  → R with || < ∞, update 𝑄0
iteratively using Eq. (10). As 𝑘 → ∞, 𝑄𝑘 converges to the unique auxiliary Q-values function of 𝜋.
Proof. Let us define an augmented reward
[
]
𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )
𝑟𝜋𝑡 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝑟𝑡 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛾 𝛼E𝑎𝑡+1 ∼𝜋 log
𝜋(𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )

(11)

Then, Eq. (10) becomes

[
]
𝑄𝑘+1 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ← 𝑟𝜋𝑡 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝,𝑎𝑡+1 ∼𝜋 𝑄𝑘 (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎𝑡+1 )

(12)

As || < ∞, the KL divergence in Eq. (11) is bounded, so
is bounded. Then, one can apply the contraction mapping theorem
to prove 𝑄𝑘 converge to the unique auxiliary Q-values, which is the same as the proof for standard reinforcement learning (Sutton
and Barto, 1998). □
𝑟𝜋𝑡 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )

For the policy improvement, the policy is updated such that the auxiliary Q-values of the new policy are higher than the old
policy. Similar to Haarnoja et al. (2018), we use a KL divergence between the old policy and the exponential of the auxiliary Q
function, and the new policy is obtained by minimizing the KL divergence as follows.
(
)
𝜋 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) exp (𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 , ⋅)∕𝛼)
𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 = ar g min 𝐷𝐾 𝐿 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) ∣∣ 𝑇 𝐶
(13)
𝜋
𝜋∈𝛱
 𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 )
where 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 ) is the partition function ensuring the right part within the KL divergence is a probability distribution. Though 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 )
is intractable and infeasible for large state spaces, it is a constant and can be ignored when calculating gradients with respect to the
7

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

policy. With this policy update rule, we can prove the new policy is better than the old policy with respect to auxiliary Q-values as
follows.
Lemma 2 (Policy Improvement Convergence). For 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 ∈ 𝛱, 𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 is the optimal solution of the problem defined in Eq. (13). With || < ∞,
𝑄𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), ∀(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ∈  × .
Proof. Denote the KL divergence term in Eq. (13) as
(
)
𝜋 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) exp (𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 , ⋅)∕𝛼)
𝐽𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝜋) = 𝐷𝐾 𝐿 𝜋(⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) ∣∣ 𝑇 𝐶
𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 )

(14)

Then, as 𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 is a minimizer of the KL divergence, we have
𝐽𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 ) ≥ 𝐽𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 )
[
]
⇒ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 log 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡 )∕𝛼 + log 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 )
[
]
≥ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 log 𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡 )∕𝛼 + log 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 )
]
[
𝜋 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠 )
⇒ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝛼 log 𝑇 𝐶 𝑡 𝑡
𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )
]
[
𝜋 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠 )
≤ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝛼 log 𝑇 𝐶 𝑡 𝑡
𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )
[
]
𝜋 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠 )
𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑
𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑
⇒ 𝑉
(𝑠𝑡 ) ≤ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑄 (𝑎𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡 ) + 𝛼 log 𝑇 𝐶 𝑡 𝑡
𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 )

(15)

(16)
(17)

Now, follow Eq. (8) to replace 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 with a formulation of 𝑉 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 , and then apply the inequality (17). By conducting these two steps
alternatively, we obtain
[
]
𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝 𝑉 𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 (𝑠𝑡+1 )
(18)
]]
[
[
𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )
𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑
(19)
≤ 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝 E𝑎𝑡 +1∼𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 𝑄 (𝑎𝑡+1 , 𝑠𝑡+1 ) + 𝛼 log
𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 (𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )
⋯

[

≤ 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) + 𝛾E𝑠𝑡+1 ∼𝑝 𝑉
=𝑄

𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤

𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤

(20)

]
(𝑠𝑡+1 )

(21)
(22)

(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) □

The policy iteration alternates between the policy evaluation and the policy improvement. Finally, we can prove the policy
iteration will converge to an optimal policy that maximizes the auxiliary Q-values as follows.
Theorem 2 (Policy Iteration Convergence). With || < ∞, starting from any policy 𝜋 0 ∈ 𝛱, conduct the policy evaluation and the policy
∗
improvement iteratively. The policy will converge to an optimal policy 𝜋 ∗ such that 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), ∀(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ∈  × , 𝜋 ∈ 𝛱.
Proof. According to Lemma 2, at each policy iteration step, we have 𝑄𝜋𝑛𝑒𝑤 ≥ 𝑄𝜋𝑜𝑙𝑑 . As the augmented rewards are bounded, 𝑄𝜋 is
also bounded. As a result, 𝑄𝜋 will converge to a certain point, where both the auxiliary Q-values and the policy converge, denoted
∗
∗
as 𝑄𝜋 . Then, we get 𝐽𝜋 ∗ (𝜋 ∗ ) ≤ 𝐽𝜋 ∗ (𝜋), ∀𝜋 ∈ 𝛱. Similar to the proof of Lemma 2, we have 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≥ 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), ∀(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ∈  × , 𝜋 ∈
𝛱. □
Note the above policy iteration process only works for tabular cases where the state space and the action space are discrete.
In more general cases where state variables and actions can be continuous. We can use approximations (e.g., neural networks) to
approximate auxiliary Q-values. In addition, at the policy evaluation or the policy improvement step, running until convergence
is computationally expensive. In the next section, we will introduce how TransRL is trained in practice, which is suitable for a
continuous state and action space.
3.2.4. Training of TransRL
To accommodate large continuous state space and action space, we use neural networks to approximate the auxiliary Q-values/Qfunction and the policy. The auxiliary Q-function is parameterized by the neural network parameters 𝜃, which is denoted as 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ).
Similarly, the parameterized policy is 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ), where 𝜙 are the parameters of the policy neural network.
For the Q-function network, the parameters are updated to minimize the Bellman residual. More specifically, the loss of the
Q-function network is given by:
[(
) ]
̂ 𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) 2
𝐽𝑄 (𝜃) = E𝑠𝑡 ,𝑎𝑡 ∼ 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑄(𝑠
(23)

8

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

where

)
(
𝜋 (𝑎 ∣ 𝑠 )
̂ 𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾 𝑄𝜃̄ (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎𝑡+1 ) + 𝛼 log 𝑇 𝐶 𝑡+1 𝑡+1 , 𝑎𝑡+1 ∼ 𝜋𝜙 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )
𝑄(𝑠
𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡+1 ∣ 𝑠𝑡+1 )

(24)

where 𝑄𝜃̄ is the target Q-function whose parameters are exponentially moving average of parameters of 𝑄𝜃 . The use of target
networks is able to stabilize the training process (Mnih et al., 2015). Then, the Q-function network is trained via stochastic gradient
descent methods with gradient
(
)
̂ 𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )
∇𝜃 𝐽𝑄 (𝜃) = 2∇𝜃 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑄(𝑠
(25)
The policy network is trained by minimizing the KL divergence in Eq. (13).
[
[
]]
𝐽𝜋 (𝜙) = E𝑠𝑡 ∼ E𝑎𝑡 ∼𝜋𝜙 log 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )∕𝛼

(26)

To enable back-propagation in updating 𝜙, the reparameterization trick is used to generate action.
(27)

𝑎𝑡 = 𝑓𝜙 (𝜖𝑡 ; 𝑠𝑡 )

where 𝜖𝑡 is independent random noise sampled from a Gaussian distribution. Afterwards, the loss function of the policy network
becomes
[
]
𝐽𝜋 (𝜙) = E𝑠𝑡 ∼,𝜖𝑡 ∼ log 𝜋𝜙 (𝑓𝜙 (𝜖𝑡 ; 𝑠𝑡 ) ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑓𝜙 (𝜖𝑡 ; 𝑠𝑡 ) ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑓𝜙 (𝜖𝑡 ; 𝑠𝑡 ))∕𝛼
(28)
Finally, the parameters 𝜙 can be updated via stochastic gradient methods with the gradient of
)
(
∇𝜙 𝐽𝜋 (𝜙) = ∇𝜙 log 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) + ∇𝑎𝑡 log 𝜋𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − ∇𝑎𝑡 log 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (𝑎𝑡 ∣ 𝑠𝑡 ) − ∇𝑎𝑡 𝑄𝜃 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ∇𝜙 𝑓𝜙 (𝜖𝑡 ; 𝑠𝑡 )

(29)

To mitigate the overestimation bias in the Q-values estimation, we use the clipped double Q-learning trick in our practical
algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018). Specifically, we use two Q-functions 𝑄𝜃𝑖 that are trained independently, and two target Q-functions
𝑄𝜃̄𝑖 . Therefore, the target Q-function in Eq. (24) is the minimum of the two target Q-functions, and the Q-function in Eq. (29) is the
minimum of the two Q-functions.
4. The real-time system optimal traffic routing problems
Suppose a morning commuting scenario on a general road network with vertices, 𝑣 ∈ , and links, 𝑙 ∈ . The origins (O) of
travel demands are 𝑔 ∈ , and the destinations (D) are 𝑒 ∈ . The set of paths from an origin 𝑔 to a destination 𝑒 is denoted as  𝑔𝑒 .
For small networks, the paths between 𝑔 and 𝑒 can be enumerated, so the path set  𝑔𝑒 contains all non-cyclic paths 𝑝𝑔𝑖 𝑒 between 𝑔
and 𝑒. For large networks, the paths cannot be enumerated, so  𝑔 𝑒 contains a small portion of all possible paths. For example, each
path set  𝑔𝑒 includes k shortest or most frequently used paths of each OD pair, or paths varying only by major alternative routes.
The demands are assumed to be time-dependent and stochastic. The whole time horizon is divided into multiple time intervals, and
each time interval is denoted by 𝑡. The demand of OD pair 𝑔 𝑒 during time interval 𝑡 is 𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 , which follows a Gaussian distribution
𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 ∼  (𝜇(𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 ), 𝜎(𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 )). Since the demand should be nonnegative, the demand is set to be zero if the sampled value is negative.
The objective of real-time system optimal traffic routing problems (Pi and Qian, 2017) is to assign all vehicles to paths so that
the total travel time of all travelers is minimized. Since the travel demands are stochastic, we cannot expect the total number of
vehicles to be assigned, nor the number of vehicles for each path in the path set. Therefore, the control actions in our formulation
are the assignment ratios across paths. The assignment ratio of path 𝑝𝑔𝑖 𝑒 between OD pair 𝑔 𝑒 during time interval 𝑡 is denoted as
∑ 𝑔𝑒
𝑔𝑒
𝑔𝑒
𝑔𝑒
𝜅𝑖,𝑡
and 𝑖 𝜅𝑖,𝑡
= 1. At the beginning of each time interval 𝑡, the control algorithm decides the path ratios 𝜅𝑖,𝑡
, so there are 𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 𝜅𝑖,𝑡
vehicles to be routed to the path 𝑝𝑔𝑖 𝑒 during time interval 𝑡. The control algorithm aims at minimizing the total travel time of all
travelers within the whole time horizon by determining path ratios.
Reliability or risk of control policies is also an important metric when implementing system optimal routing in the field. In traffic
operations, a question of high interest is how bad the worst cases during RL online process are compared with the User Equilibrium
(i.e., no-control) scenario. On top of the well-known risk measure Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) which was originally proposed
in finance (Acerbi and Tasche, 2002) and has been popular in safe RL recently (Chan et al., 2019), we propose a risk measure
Conditional Travel Time Reduction at Risk (CTTRaR) for travel time reduction problems. CVaR for total travel time is given by
CVaR𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ) = E[𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ∣ 𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ≥ 𝑉 𝑎𝑅𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 )]

(30)

where 𝑉 𝑎𝑅𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ) is the 𝑥-quantile of the distribution of total travel time (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ). Then, CTTRaR is
CTTRaR𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 ) = CVaR𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇𝑈 𝐸 ) − CVaR𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 )

(31)

where CVaR𝑥 (𝑇 𝑇 𝑇𝑈 𝐸 ) is the CVaR of 𝑇 𝑇 𝑇 in the UE (no-control) scenario. Generally, CTTRaR measures, in the worst performance
cases, how much total travel time the control method can reduce compared with the no-control scenario. CTTRaR provides a way
to evaluate the reliability of the control methods that aims to reduce travel time.
9

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

In this study, the environment  is a mesoscopic traffic simulation. The flow dynamics are presented by the well-known Cell
Transmission Model (CTM) (Daganzo, 1994, 1995). CTM is a discrete-time traffic flow model commonly used to simulate traffic
on highways and arterial roads. It is based on the Lighthill–Whitham–Richards (LWR) traffic flow model, which describes traffic
as a fluid. CTM simplifies the LWR model by discretizing both space and time, allowing it to be implemented computationally. To
account for realistic phenomenon such as queue spillback, node model in Nie and Zhang (2010) is adopted. CTM and node model
essentially determine how the environment state evolves given the current state, input demands, and control actions.
̃ is built and real travel demands 𝐪 are predicted as 𝐪̃ based on
From the perspective of practitioners, a physical traffic model 
̃ is also composed of CTM and
historical data, which are leveraged by the model-based approach and TransRL. The traffic model 
̃ is same as the environment  with regard to fixed properties of the road network, including
the node model. The traffic model 
network topology and link length. However, the parameters including capacity, free flow speed, and the available number of lanes are
̃ This discrepancy can stem from the stochastic capacity or
likely to be different among the environment  and the traffic model .
unexpected incidents that block lanes. The real travel demands 𝐪 are assumed to follow a probability distribution, and the predicted
demands 𝐪̃ are distribution expectations.
4.1. Approach 1: deterministic system optimal dynamic traffic assignment as a transportation domain model
To solve the above real-time system optimal routing problems, one model-based approach is to solve an optimal solution offline
̃ and estimated demands 𝐪.
̃
̃ One can solve a system-optimal dynamic traffic assignment (SODTA) 
by leveraging traffic models 
̃ Then, the solved SODTA can suggest optimal path flows for each time interval. During the online experiments, the vehicles
and 𝐪.
are assigned with paths according to the pre-calculated path ratios.
In this study, we implement the solution algorithm in Qian et al. (2012) to solve SODTA. First, the path marginal cost is
approximated, so the system-optimal paths can be identified. Then, the well-known method of successive averages (MSA) can be
applied to solve SODTA iteratively. The policy obtained by solving SODTA offline is denoted as pre-DSO.
̃ and  and the estimation error of 𝐪.
̃ On if the traffic
The performance of pre-DSO depends on the difference between 
̃ =  and 𝐪̃ = 𝐪), pre-DSO is the optimal solution to
model and the estimated demands perfectly align with the real case (i.e., 
̃ and
the routing problems. This is clearly not viable in practice. Thus, we must consider a model mismatch between  and ,
uncertain demands varying from estimated demand. As a result, pre-DSO is no longer guaranteed to be optimal, and possibly far
from being optimal.
4.2. Approach 2: model-free reinforcement learning
The real-time optimal traffic routing problem can be formulated into an MDP. Then, the MDP can be solved by standard
reinforcement learning with continuous action space (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018)). Here
we introduce how the essential elements of the MDP are defined for the real-time routing problem.
State. States of the network or environment can be defined as
𝑠𝑡 = [𝑢𝑙𝑡 ], ∀𝑙 ∈ 

(32)

where 𝑢𝑙𝑡 is the number of vehicles passing link 𝑙 during time interval 𝑡.
Observation. In realistic scenarios, the states of the whole road network cannot be accessed. Instead, only a portion of links
̂ More specifically, sensors collect real-time speeds and flows and
is observed through sensors, and the set of observed links is .
send the averages during the last time interval at the beginning of the current time interval. Then, the control algorithm takes these
real-time data (i.e., observations) as input and accordingly output actions. Therefore, observations of the environment are defined
as
𝑜𝑡 = [𝑡, 𝑓𝑡𝑙 , 𝑑𝑡𝑙 ], ∀𝑙 ∈ ̂
𝑓𝑡𝑙

(33)

𝑑𝑡𝑙

where
and
are average flow and speed during time interval 𝑡 on link 𝑙. 𝑡 is included as an analogy of time of the day.
Action. In our formulation, the control algorithm determines the path assignment ratios, so actions are path ratios as follows.
𝑔𝑒
𝑎𝑡 = [𝜅𝑖,𝑡
], ∀𝑝𝑔𝑖 𝑒 ∈  𝑔𝑒 , 𝑔 ∈ , 𝑒 ∈ 

(34)

Reward. The control objective of the real-time system optimal routing problems is to minimize the total travel time of all vehicles
during the whole time horizon as follows.
∑∑
min
𝜂
𝑢𝑙𝑡
(35)
𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

𝑡

𝑙

where 𝜂 is the length of each time interval. If the reward 𝑟𝑡 = −𝜂
of reinforcement learning as follows.
∑∑
∑
min
𝜂
𝑢𝑙𝑡 ⟺
max
𝛾 𝑡 𝑟𝑡
𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

𝑡

𝑙

𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

∑

𝑙
𝑙 𝑢𝑡

with 𝛾 = 1, the control objective is equivalent to the objective
(36)

𝑡

However, we do not assume 𝑢𝑙𝑡 is accessible for all links. An alternative and more practical way is to use the number of vehicles
leaving the controlled road network during each time interval, which can be retrieved by monitoring the periphery of the controlled
10

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

road network. The number of leaving/finished vehicles at the end of time interval 𝑡 is denoted as 𝐹𝑡 and the number of vehicles
within the area at the beginning of the whole time horizon is denoted as 𝑁0 . Now, we have
∑∑
min 𝜂
𝑢𝑙𝑡
(37)
𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

⟺
⟺

min

𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

max

𝑎1 ,𝑎2 ,…,𝑎𝑡 ,…

𝑡

𝜂

𝑙

∑

(

𝑡

∑

𝑁0 +

∑∑
𝑔

)
𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 − 𝐹𝑡

(38)

𝑒

(39)

𝐹𝑡

𝑡

Based on the above reasoning, the reward function is given as
𝐹 − 𝐹̄𝑡
𝑟𝑡 ≡ 𝑡
(40)
𝑁
where 𝐹̄𝑡 is the average number of finished vehicles in the past and 𝑁 is a constant that approximately scales the reward into a
range of [−10, 10]. We found the usage of 𝐹̄𝑡 improved the training of reinforcement learning as it normalizes rewards along time
intervals, and the usage of 𝑁 accelerated the training process as the reward scale is constrained into a small range and thereby
quicker convergence in Q-values.
4.3. Approach 3: TransRL
For fair comparisons, TransRL has the same state, observation, action, and reward definitions as model-free reinforcement
learning elaborated in Section 4.2. However, TransRL differentiates from model-free reinforcement learning through integrating
̃ and estimated demands 𝐪̃ in Section 4 into RL
prior information from physical models. TransRL incorporates the traffic model 
̃ and 𝐪.
̃ Then, TransRL learns from the teacher policy.
by developing a teacher policy from the pre-DSO that is solved on top of 
Specifically, pre-DSO can output an action 𝜏(𝑠) given a state 𝑠. We ignore the subscript 𝑡 here for readability. 𝜏(𝑠) is not
differentiable with regard to 𝑠 as the pre-DSO policy is solved iteratively using the MSA algorithm that is intractable due to its
iterative nature. This prohibits gradient propagation during training. Therefore, a differentiable neural network 𝜇(𝑠) is leveraged to
imitate the pre-DSO policy by minimizing the mean squared loss between 𝜏(𝑠) and 𝜇(𝑠).
In addition, a deterministic teacher policy will push the RL policy to be deterministic, which is not desired either in training or
testing. Therefore, the teacher policy should be stochastic to enable better exploration and control performances. As a result, the
teacher policy 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 is defined as a Multivariate normal distribution
𝑎𝑇 𝐶 ∼ 𝜋𝑇 𝐶 (⋅ ∣ 𝑠) =  (𝜇(𝑠), 𝛴)

(41)

where the mean vector 𝜇(𝑠) is approximately equal to 𝜏(𝑠), and 𝛴 is assumed to be a diagonal matrix
⎡𝜎
0⎤
⎢
⎥
𝜎
⎥
𝛴=⎢
⎢
⎥
⋱
⎢0
𝜎 ⎥⎦
⎣

(42)

where 𝜎 is the unreliability parameter to tune how much TransRL should rely on the model-based policy pre-DSO. Implicitly, as the
̃ If the unreliability parameter is infinity, the
unreliability parameter increases, TransRL is less dependent on the traffic model .
̃ is not used at all.
action distribution is almost a uniform distribution, which means the information from the model 
5. Experiments
We conduct extensive experiments on three networks, including an abstractive two-route network, a synthetic network, and a
large network with hundreds of links. In all three networks, we assume the demands are uncertain and follow Gaussian distributions
𝑞𝑡𝑞 𝑒 ∼  (𝑞̃𝑡𝑞𝑒 , 𝛽 𝑞̃𝑡𝑞 𝑒 ), where 𝑞̃𝑡𝑞 𝑒 is the historical average demand and 𝛽 is a parameter of demand uncertainty level. In the synthetic
̃ and the real system dynamics , and the model mismatch
network, we assume a model mismatch between the traffic model 
stems from the parameter estimation errors (i.e., inaccurate free-flow speeds and critical densities). In the large network, the model
mismatch is caused by unexpected incidents that block lanes.
Our proposed algorithm TransRL is compared with various routing strategies and baselines, which are summarized as follows.
• Model-based method: pre-DSO. This is the policy obtained in Section 4.1, namely through System Optimal Dynamic Traffic
Assignment.
• Model-free reinforcement learning: PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). PPO is a state-of-the-art policy optimization algorithm. PPO
updates policy by maximizing the advantages while using a clip operation to make sure the updated policy does not go far
from the old policy.
• Model-free reinforcement learning: SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). SAC is a state-of-the-art model-free reinforcement learning
algorithm. SAC uses value networks to evaluate state–action pairs and policy networks to output actions. The most notable
attribute of SAC is the entropy term in the objective. SAC aims at maximizing returns while maintaining a policy as stochastic
as possible, which enables SAC to explore the environment sufficiently and avoid being stuck at a local optimum.
11

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 3. The abstractive network and demands.

• No-control baseline: User Equilibrium(UE). In the large network where some count and speed data are available, we conducted
an dynamic OD estimation, and the path ratios from the OD estimation were applied and regarded as the UE baseline.
5.1. An abstractive network with uncertain demands
The first network is the abstractive 2-route network in Pi and Qian (2017). The 2-route network is an abstraction of a general
network during morning peak hours (see Fig. 3(a)). After abstraction, the network connects the residential neighborhoods (the
origin) and the downtown (the destination) through two routes: (1) route 1 is the main corridor with high free-flow speed but with
limited capacity, and (2) route 2 is the aggregation of all local streets with low free-flow speed but with sufficient capacity. The
action is the ratio of demands choosing route 1.
During morning peak hours, typical demands increase and then decrease as Fig. 3(b) shows. At each time step, the demand
follows a Gaussian distribution 𝑞𝑡 ∼  (𝜇𝑡 , 𝛽 𝜇𝑡 ), where 𝜇𝑡 is the historical mean demand at time 𝑡 and 𝛽 is the demand uncertainty
parameter. In our experiments, we considered three scenarios, including a low demand uncertainty scenario (𝛽 = 0.05), a medium
demand uncertainty scenario (𝛽 = 0.10), and a high demand uncertainty scenario (𝛽 = 0.20).
5.1.1. Training of reinforcement learning
TransRL, PPO, and SAC were trained on all three scenarios with the same observation definition, action definition, and reward
function. For comparison, the hyperparameters of each RL are the same in three scenarios. The training process is plotted in Fig. 4.
There are two main findings. First, among all three scenarios, TransRL converged quicker than PPO and SAC, while even after
convergence, returns of TransRL were higher than PPO and SAC. This indicates that TransRL is more efficient in finding a good
policy and this policy is better than those found by PPO and SAC. In addition, the differences between the three RL decrease as the
demand uncertainty level increases. This is reasonable. As the demand uncertainty level increases, the actions from the pre-DSO
are less close to the optimal actions because the demand estimation is less accurate. As a result, the information from the teacher
policy is less informative when the demand uncertainty level is larger.
To shed insights on how TransRL learns from the teacher policy and presents interpretability, the actions from TransRL and SAC
are plotted in Fig. 5. For comparison, the actions from the pre-DSO and DSO are also included. As an analytical model-based policy,
pre-DSO delivers interpretable implications (Pi and Qian, 2017). The optimal path ratios depend on the specific demands. While
DSO uses the actual demands to calculate the optimal path ratios, pre-DSO calculates the ‘‘optimal’’ path ratios using historical mean
demands which work as an approximation of the actual demands. As pre-DSO depends on historical mean demands, the actions of
pre-DSO are pre-calculated and deterministic along different episodes and different demand scenarios. DSO uses actual demands, so
the actions are calculated in real time. As Fig. 5 shows, the difference between pre-DSO and DSO increases as demand uncertainty
becomes high because the actual demands deviate more from the historical mean demands in the high demand uncertainty scenario.
As a consequence, pre-DSO performs worse as demand uncertainty increases.
Compared with SAC, TransRL is much more efficient in retrieving a policy close to the optimal policy. In all three demand
scenarios, it took 100 episodes that SAC learned to decrease the action during the first 10 time steps, and it took another 300
episodes for SAC to learn to increase the actions during the last 10 time steps. In contrast, TransRL learned the general pattern
of decreasing and then increasing actions after just 5 episodes, which indicates the teacher policy boosted the learning process of
TransRL. Notably, different from pre-DSO whose actions are fixed, TransRL is adaptive to real-time states and can continuously
learn from interactions.
Furthermore, the actions from TransRL are more interpretable than SAC because the actions from TransRL are consistent with the
analytical implications from the model-based method and are more stable over time. The analytical implications from Pi and Qian
(2017) indicate the path ratio should decrease to deviate vehicles from the main corridor (i.e., route 1) to the local streets (i.e., route
12

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 4. Training on the 2-route network.

2) as the congestion arises, and then increase to 100% to fully utilize the capacity of the main corridor when the congestion is
about to disappear. Actions from the TransRL are consistent with such analytical implications because of the teacher policy that
implicitly incorporates such domain knowledge. Besides, the actions of SAC present strong fluctuation over time, which seems to
be uninterpretable. In contrast, the actions of TransRL are more stable and thereby interpretable.
5.1.2. Control performances of online tests
After the training, we tested all control methods for 100 episodes under uncertain demands with the same random seed. In
the no-control case (i.e., UE), the travel time on both routes is identical so that no traveler can benefit from changing routes. For
comparison, we also tested the stochastic optimal method in Pi and Qian (2017), which can be regarded as the optimum without
knowing the actual demands in advance. Pi and Qian (2017) analytically formulates the optimal routing problem of the 2-route
network and solves the stochastic optimal policy using dynamic programming, denoted as DP.
The total travel time under different control methods is summarized in Table 1 and plotted in Fig. 6. Compared with the nocontrol case, all control methods could significantly reduce the total travel time. The comparison between the model-based method
(i.e., pre-DSO) and the model-free RL (i.e., PPO and SAC) is interesting. With low or medium demand uncertainty, pre-DSO led
to lower total travel time than PPO and SAC. However, when the demand uncertainty is high, SAC outperformed pre-DSO. This
indicates the model-based method performs well when the actual system is close to the approximation, but it is brittle to information
inaccuracy. While model-free RL is adaptive, it does not fully utilize prior information.
Notably, in all three demand scenarios, TransRL outperformed both the model-based method and the model-free RL in reducing
total travel time and was pretty close to the stochastic optimum (i.e., DP). This can be attributed to TransRL combining the
advantages of RL and the model-based method. As an RL, TransRL is able to adapt to real-time states and learn from the training
experiences. On the other hand, it utilizes the prior information from the model and historical mean demands.
The reliability of control methods is measured using the proposed metric CTTRaR𝑥 , which is listed in Table 2. Higher CTTRaR𝑥
indicates more reliability in worst cases. With low demand uncertainty, pre-DSO is more reliable than SAC, but SAC is more reliable
than pre-DSO when demand uncertainty is medium or high. Except for the stochastic optimum (DP), TransRL is the most reliable
with low or medium demand uncertainty, and SAC is the most reliable with high demand uncertainty. This indicates that when
demand uncertainty is high, a more stochastic policy is more reliable. Overall, TransRL is more reliable than pre-DSO, PPO, and
SAC.
5.1.3. Sensitivity analysis of the unreliability parameter
In TransRL, the unreliability parameter 𝜎 determines how much the TransRL should depend on the transportation method and
how extensive TransRL should explore the action space. To look into the impacts of the unreliability parameter, we compared the
training processes and the control performances of TransRL with different unreliability parameters.
13

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 5. Policy evolution on the 2-route network.

Table 1
Total travel time on the 2-route network during 100 test episodes.
Total travel time

UE (no control)
pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (ours)
DP (stochastic optimal)

Low demand
uncertainty

Medium demand
uncertainty

High demand
uncertainty

Average

SD

Average

SD

Average

SD

17 334.72
9592.76
11 410.16
9782.19
9592.45
9450.98

266.92
350.95
450.78
239.96
255.91
239.24

17 346.28
9959.54
11 193.19
9971.37
9817.92
9730.62

522.11
706.23
633.29
488.80
496.42
497.39

17 341.98
10 683.08
11 597.74
10 463.12
10357.36
10 267.50

997.96
1415.86
1091.86
930.34
1031.81
918.97

Table 2
CTTRaR𝑥 on the 2-route network during 100 test episodes. The quantile 𝑥 is set to be 10%,
which means the top 10% worst episodes.

pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (ours)
DP (stochastic optimal)

Low demand
uncertainty

Medium demand
uncertainty

High demand
uncertainty

CTTRaR𝑥

CTTRaR𝑥

CTTRaR𝑥

7510.85
5318.24
7507.93
7700.58
7917.94

6881.29
5531.50
7385.84
7422.13
7580.57

5535.49
6068.37
7054.28
6764.85
7180.80

14

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 6. Average total travel time on the 2-route network during 100 test episodes.

Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis on the 2-route network: training process.

The training processes with different unreliability parameters under three demand scenarios are plotted in Fig. 7. In general, the
training process was insensitive to the unreliability parameter. After convergence, different parameters led to similar performances.
In low or medium demand uncertainty scenarios, the value of the unreliability parameter did affect the convergence speed, and
smaller unreliability parameters led to faster convergence. While in the high demand uncertainty, the convergence speed was almost
identical along different parameters. The control performances with different parameters align with this phenomenon. As Fig. 8
shows, the control performances were generally incentive to the parameters, and small unreliability parameters performed better
than large unreliability parameters in low or medium demand uncertainty scenarios.
5.2. A synthetic network with uncertain demands and model mismatch
The second network for experiments is a synthetic corridor network first used in Nie (2006). As Fig. 9 shows, the corridor
network, which aims to abstract a commuting network, is composed of 18 links and 16 nodes. Links 1–2, 2–4, 4–6, 6–8, and 8–10
are freeway links, so these links has high free-flow slow and large capacity. In addition, link 6–8 is a bottleneck with smaller capacity
15

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 8. Sensitivity analysis on the 2-route network: total travel time.

caused by a lane-drop. Links 3–5, 5–7, and 7–9 are arterial links with lower free-flow speed than freeway links. Links 3–2, 4–5, 7–6,
and 8–9 are on-ramp or off-ramp connecting freeway links with arterial links. All the other links are local streets connecting nodes
with arterial links or freeway links.
We consider many-to-one OD pairs and each OD pair has a typical single-peak demand pattern. Specifically, node 11 and node
12 are the origin nodes, while node 15 is the destination node. At each time step, the demand follows a Gaussian distribution
𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 ∼  (𝜇𝑡𝑔 𝑒 , 𝛽 𝜇𝑡𝑔𝑒 ), where 𝜇𝑡𝑔𝑒 is the historical mean demand of OD pair 𝑔 𝑒 at time 𝑡 and 𝛽 = 0.10 is the demand uncertainty
parameter. Between each OD pair, there are multiple routes composed of freeway links and/or arterial links to choose from.
In this network, we also consider a model mismatch between the actual system dynamics () that is unknown in practice, and
̃ The network is modeled by CTM, and CTM cells are defined by length, the number
the approximated/estimated traffic model ().
of lanes, free-flow speed, capacity, and jam density. In the real world, the estimated free-flow speed and capacity may differ from
the actual unknown values, which causes a model mismatch. In our experiments, we randomly set the free-flow speed and capacity
̃ to be 10%–20% higher or lower than those in the actual system dynamics  where the online RL models
in the traffic model 
are not offline trained by.
This scenario is more challenging than the 2-route network. First, there are more links and routes than the 2-route network,
so the state space and action space are larger. Besides, some routes share the same links, which makes the system dynamics more
complicated. More importantly, a model mismatch exists, so it is more challenging for the model-based method (pre-DSO) and
TransRL.
5.2.1. Training of reinforcement learning
The training processes of PPO and SAC are plotted in Fig. 10. PPO was struggling to find a reasonable policy and did not converge
after 2000 episodes. While SAC converged after approximately 500 episodes, the performance was pretty fluctuating even after the
convergence. The performance of PPO and SAC indicates the increase in state and action space makes model-free reinforcement
learning less efficient than learning from random exploration.
TransRL with different unreliability parameters is also compared in Fig. 10. With various unreliability parameters, TransRL
learned faster and reached a more stable performance than PPO and SAC. Besides, comparing TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.05 and TransRL
with 𝜎 = 0.10, we can find TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.05 converged faster than TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.10, but TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.10 ended
with a slightly higher return than TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.10. This indicates a trade-off between the convergence speed and the final
performance. When 𝜎 = 0.20, the TransRL was similar to SAC, which supported Theorem 1 claiming SAC is equivalent to TransRL
with a teacher policy of uniform distribution (i.e., 𝜎 = ∞ in this case).
16

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 9. The synthetic corridor network.

Fig. 10. Training on the corridor network.

5.2.2. Control performances of online tests
We tested trained RL and baselines for 100 test episodes with the same uncertain demands and model mismatch. The resultant
total travel time is summarized in Table 3 and also plotted in Fig. 11. Though demands and the traffic model used in the model-based
method (pre-DSO) are different from the actual demands and actual system dynamics, pre-DSO outperformed both model-free RL
(SAC and PPO) in reducing total travel time. The average total travel time of PPO was even higher than the no-control baseline.
With all three unreliability parameters, TransRL led to a lower average total travel time than PPO and SAC. When the unreliability
parameter 𝜎 of TransRL is 0.05 or 0.10, the average total travel time of TransRL was lower than pre-DSO. When 𝜎 = 0.20, the average
total travel time of pre-DSO was lower than TransRL. In summary, TransRL with 𝜎 = 0.10 got the best control performance. The
results also indicate careful tuning of the unreliability parameter can further enhance the performance of TransRL.
The reliability results of control methods on the corridor network are included in Table 4. CTTRaR𝑥 of PPO and SAC are negative,
which means, in the worst cases, PPO and SAC perform worse than the no-control baseline. Both pre-DSO and TransRL are reliable
as CTTRaR𝑥 is high. Interestingly, while TransRL (𝜎 = 0.10) leads to the lowest average total travel time, TransRL (𝜎 = 0.05) is the
most reliable. Results on this network indicate that, even when model-free RL is not very reliable, TransRL is still reliable because
of the action constraints from the teacher policy.
17

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 11. Total travel time on the corridor network during 100 test episodes.

Table 3
Total travel time on the corridor network during 100 test episodes.
Total travel time (h)

Average

SD

UE (no control)
pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.05)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.10)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.20)

117 540.56
113 351.17
128 814.06
116 072.38
112915.17
112 380.91
115 536.98

1256.21
1347.67
3152.06
2720.69
1357.93
1550.75
1769.41

Table 4
CTTRaR𝑥 on the corridor network during 100 test episodes. The
quantile 𝑥 is set to be 10%, which means the top 10% worst
episodes.
CTTRaR𝑥
pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.05)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.10)
TransRL (𝜎 = 0.20)

4249.26
−13089.30
−2125.19
4418.89
3882.36
1357.70

5.3. A large network with uncertain demands and traffic model mismatch
The third network we experiment on is the Transportation Systems Management and Operations (TSMO) # 1 network in
Maryland, US. TSMO network contains a freeway I-70 and multiple US routes. As Fig. 12 shows, there are 621 links, 361 nodes,
and 182 OD pairs on the TSMO network. During morning peak hours, most travelers travel from west to east or south, and the
eastbound of the I-70 is recurrently congested. One simulation episode spans from 6:00 – 13:00, which is divided into 15-minute
intervals.
To estimate the demands of the TSMO network, we adopted the Dynamic OD demand Estimation (DODE) in Ma et al. (2020)
using historical count data within the TSMO network. The DODE aims to solve dynamic demands to reproduce the link flows
that match the historical count data. After estimating the dynamic demands, we generate demands using a Gaussian distribution
𝑞𝑡𝑔𝑒 ∼  (𝜇𝑡𝑔𝑒 , 𝛽 𝜇𝑡𝑔𝑒 ), where 𝜇𝑡𝑔𝑒 is the estimated demand of OD pair 𝑔 𝑒 at time 𝑡 and 𝛽 = 0.10 is the demand uncertainty parameter.
We consider two incident scenarios to evaluate the performances of the studied methods with unexpected incidents. Specifically,
̃ is the network without incidents, while the actual system dynamics  is the network
the accessible (approximated) traffic model 
̃ and  are assumed to be the same to
with unexpected incidents. Note, except for the incident links, the other attributes of 
independently analyze the impacts of the incidents. The incident locations are marked using stars as Fig. 12 shows. Both incidents
happen on the freeway, and travelers cannot deviate from the incident location while observing the incident. Therefore, the incidents
on the freeway will cause a nontrivial change in system dynamics. With the occurrence of incidents, we assume one lane is blocked
and the free-flow speed decreases on the incident link.
18

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 12. The TSMO network.

In our optimal traffic routing problem, we consider a practical setting, where only a few links are observed and a few OD pairs are
under control (e.g., the flow among those OD pairs may be influenced by dynamic message signs or naturally in a better geographic
position to make route choices). More specifically, the number of observed links is 14, and the observed links are highlighted in
Fig. 12. Among 182 OD pairs, there are 14 OD pairs of which flows can be influenced to re-route.

5.3.1. Calibration of dynamic demands
Within the historical count data in the TSMO network, vehicles are classified into cars and trucks, we adopted the multi-class
dynamic OD demand estimation (MCDODE) in Ma et al. (2020) to estimate car demands and truck demands. The results of MCDODE
for the TSMO network are plotted in Fig. 13. The loss shows the MCDODE converged to a stable solution for both car data and truck
data. The scatter plots in Fig. 13 compare the observed count data and the estimated count data generated by the estimated demands.
Most estimated data matched the observed data pretty well. The data points where the estimated data is significantly lower than
the observed data can be attributed to the links located in the marginal area. After the estimation of the demands, we convert all
vehicles into passenger car units (PCU) using passenger car equivalent (PCE) for subsequent experiments.

5.3.2. Training of reinforcement learning
The training processes of PPO, SAC, and TransRL in both incident scenarios are compared in Fig. 14. In incident scenario A,
compared with SAC, PPO converged faster and ended with higher returns. However, in incident scenario B, SAC converged faster
than PPO, and PPO could not converge after 1000 episodes. This suggests none of the two model-free RLs dominates with the
occurrence of unexpected incidents. On the other hand, TransRL converged faster and reached higher returns than PPO and SAC.
Besides, TransRL in incident scenario A took more episodes to converge than TransRL in incident scenario B. This may be due to
incident A impacting the system dynamics more significantly.

5.3.3. Control performances of online tests
The trained RL and pre-DSO were tested for 100 episodes with uncertain demands in the two incident scenarios. The total travel
time is summarized in Table 5 and plotted in Fig. 15. The comparison between the model-based method (pre-DSO) and the two
model-free RLs (i.e., PPO and SAC) is ambiguous. In incident scenario A, PPO and SAC led to lower total travel time than pre-DSO,
and pre-DSO even increased total travel time compared with the no-control case. In incident scenario B, pre-DSO outperformed PPO
and SAC. This suggests that, under certain circumstances, incidents change the system dynamics so significantly that the model-based
method may not improve the system. In contrast, TransRL outperformed pre-DSO, PPO, and SAC in both incident scenarios. This is
interesting. The performance of TransRL in incident scenario A indicates that, even the model mismatch is non-trivial, TransRL is
able to uncover a good policy after exploration and learning.
Table 6 summarizes the reliability results. The reliability of model-free RL and pre-DSO is mixed. While PPO is more reliable
than pre-DSO in incident scenario A, pre-DSO is more reliable than PPO in incident scenario B. In contrast, TransRL is the most
reliable in both incident scenarios.
19

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 13. DODE for the TSMO network.

Fig. 14. Training on the TSMO network.

Table 5
Total travel time on the TSMO network during 100 test episodes.
Scenario

Incident A

Total travel time (h)

Average

SD

Incident B
Average

SD

UE (no control)
pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (ours)

129 028.95
135 113.66
126579.58
128 485.32
126 506.81

1932.23
2066.20
2161.90
2717.12
2002.43

141 198.15
140529.34
145 846.63
141 805.64
140 072.43

3058.50
3054.75
3536.11
3569.62
2627.40

20

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Fig. 15. Total travel time on the TSMO network during 100 test episodes.

Table 6
CTTRaR𝑥 on the TSMO network during 100 test episodes. The
quantile 𝑥 is set to be 10%, which means the top 10% worst
episodes.

pre-DSO (model-based)
PPO (model-free RL)
SAC (model-free RL)
TransRL (ours)

Incident A

Incident B

CTTRaR𝑥

CTTRaR𝑥

−6819.32
2871.87
−1466.95
3216.34

117.93
−3923.66
−2614.68
1506.50

6. Conclusion and future work
This paper studies real-time system optimal traffic routing problems in general and sizable transportation networks with
uncertainties. A small portion of vehicles are assumed to follow routing guidances by a centralized control algorithm. The objective
of the control algorithm is to minimize the total expected travel time of all vehicles within the transportation network. We develop
a novel RL model guided by a teacher policy that is derived directly from transportation domain models. Considering the realism
of RL algorithms in real-world traffic operation, realistic testing scenarios are developed to test RL algorithms where the actual
demands are stochastic and unknown, and there are model mismatches between the accessible traffic models that offline train RL
models and the actual and unknown system dynamics testing RL models.
To incorporate the prior knowledge of the traffic models into RL, we proposed a novel RL framework TransRL. The reward of
TransRL is composed of (1) a reward from the environment, and (2) a penalty reward that measures the distance between the current
policy and the teacher policy deriving from the traffic model-based policy. An unreliability parameter is proposed to tune how much
TransRL is concentrated on the traffic model-based policy. The experiments show that TransRL consistently outperforms the traffic
model-based method and model-free RLs in reducing total travel time. Moreover, the actions of TransRL are more interpretable and
reliable than model-free RLs.
We compare a traffic model-based RL with model-free RLs under different levels of demand uncertainties and model mismatches.
The experiments suggest the traffic model-based RL, namely TransRL, performs well when the demand uncertainty level is low or
medium and the model mismatch is mildlysignificant. Model-free RLs are agnostic to uncertain demands and system dynamics, so
their performances are consistent along different demand uncertainties and model mismatches.
The superior performance of TransRL compared to baseline RL algorithms and the model-based methods can be attributed to the
integration of domain-specific knowledge with reinforcement learning. By leveraging a teacher policy derived from a combination
of the physics model and model-based solutions, TransRL effectively prioritizes the exploration of the search space, significantly
enhancing learning efficiency. Additionally, TransRL’s ability to interact continuously with the environment ensures adaptability to
dynamic and uncertain conditions, a capability that traditional model-based methods often lack.
The sensitivity analysis of the unreliability parameter has provided valuable insights into its impact on the performance of
TransRL. Future research could focus on quantifying the model mismatch between the physics model and the environment, and
integrating it with the unreliability parameter. Such efforts could not only further improve the performance of TransRL, but also
shed light on mitigaing model mismatch.
Bridging the gap between simulation and real-world conditions is also essential for the successful deployment of TransRL in
practice. Potential strategies include domain randomization to expose the model to a wide range of scenarios during training,
fine-tuning with real-world data to adapt the policy to specific conditions, and integrating physics-based modeling to enhance
the fidelity of the simulation. These methods can collectively mitigate discrepancies, ensuring the robustness and reliability of
the framework. While this study focuses on the foundational aspects of TransRL, future research will explore these approaches to
enhance its real-world applicability.
21

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.
Table A.7
Hyperparameters of reinforcement learning algorithms.
Hyperparameter

Search range

Selected value

Comments

Learning rate

{10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 }

10−3

Batch size

{64, 128, 256, 512}

128

Learning rate for the value
networks and policy networks.
Batch size for the value networks
and policy networks.
The number of the random
exploration steps in the
beginning.
The episode will be forced to
terminate once it exceeds the
maximum steps.
Reward discount factor.
Entropy regularization coefficient
(only applicable to SAC and
TransRL).

102 ,

103 ,

104 }

102

Start steps

{10,

Maximum
episode length

{1000}

1000

Gamma
Alpha

{0.99, 1.00}
[0.1, 1.0]

1.00
0.2

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zemian Ke: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Qiling
Zou: Writing – original draft, Software, Formal analysis, Data curation. Jiachao Liu: Writing – original draft, Visualization,
Formal analysis, Data curation. Sean Qian: Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by US Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration’s Exploratory Advanced
Research Award 693JJ321C000013. The contents of this paper reflect the views of the authors only, who are responsible for the
facts and the accuracy of the information presented herein.
Appendix

Hyperparameter tuning
To determine the optimal hyperparameters for TransRL and the baseline RL algorithms, we conducted a systematic random
search over the parameter space. Table A.7 are the details of the hyperparameters considered and their final selected values.
The final number of epochs was determined by observing the convergence behavior in terms of the reward curve and training
losses, ensuring that training continued until the learning process stabilized. These selected parameters were used consistently across
algorithms where applicable to ensure comparison fairness.
Computation cost
We conduct experiments on a server with one CPU (model: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7700K CPU @ 4.20 GHz) and two GPUs (model:
NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti). Main computation cost of the development of the teacher policy is applying the method of successive
averages (MSA) to solve optimal routing ratios iteratively. For the largest network (i.e., the TSMO network), this step took several
hours. In our study, the state variables are numerical variables from traffic sensors, and action is the routing ratios. Thus, value
networks and policy networks are not wide or deep. As a result, the training of TransRL took less than a day, and the inference of
the learned policy can be finished within seconds on our machine.
References
Acerbi, Carlo, Tasche, Dirk, 2002. Expected shortfall: a natural coherent alternative to value at risk. Econ. Notes 31 (2), 379–388.
Adler, Jeffrey L., Blue, Victor J., 2002. A cooperative multi-agent transportation management and route guidance system. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol.
10 (5–6), 433–454.
Adler, Jeffrey L., Satapathy, Goutam, Manikonda, Vikram, Bowles, Betty, Blue, Victor J., 2005. A multi-agent approach to cooperative traffic management and
route guidance. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 39 (4), 297–318.
Aerde, M. Van, Case, E.R., 1988. Individual driver route guidance systems and their implications for traffic control. Can. J. Civ. Eng. 15 (2), 152–156.
Arnott, Richard, De Palma, Andre, Lindsey, Robin, 1991. Does providing information to drivers reduce traffic congestion? Transp. Res. Part A: Gen. 25 (5),
309–318.
Bai, Zhengwei, Hao, Peng, Shangguan, Wei, Cai, Baigen, Barth, Matthew J., 2022. Hybrid reinforcement learning-based eco-driving strategy for connected and
automated vehicles at signalized intersections. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23 (9), 15850–15863.
22

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Chan, Stephanie C.Y., Fishman, Samuel, Canny, John, Korattikara, Anoop, Guadarrama, Sergio, 2019. Measuring the reliability of reinforcement learning
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.05663.
Chen, Haipeng, An, Bo, Sharon, Guni, Hanna, Josiah, Stone, Peter, Miao, Chunyan, Soh, Yeng, 2018. Dyetc: Dynamic electronic toll collection for traffic congestion
alleviation. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 32.
Chen, Jianyu, Li, Shengbo Eben, Tomizuka, Masayoshi, 2022. Interpretable End-to-End Urban Autonomous Driving With Latent Deep Reinforcement Learning.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ISSN: 15580016) 23 (6), 5068–5078. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.3046646, arXiv:2001.08726.
Chen, Zhibin, Lin, Xi, Yin, Yafeng, Li, Meng, 2020. Path controlling of automated vehicles for system optimum on transportation networks with heterogeneous
traffic stream. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. (ISSN: 0968090X) 110 (November 2019), 312–329. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.11.017.
Chen, Changyu, Wang, Xiting, Jin, Yiqiao, Dong, Victor Ye, Dong, Li, Cao, Jie, Liu, Yi, Yan, Rui, 2023. Semi-offline reinforcement learning for optimized text
generation. In: ICML.
Daganzo, Carlos F., 1994. The cell transmission model: A dynamic representation of highway traffic consistent with the hydrodynamic theory. Transp. Res. Part
B: Methodol. 28 (4), 269–287.
Daganzo, Carlos F., 1995. The cell transmission model, part II: network traffic. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 29 (2), 79–93.
Do Chung, Byung, Yao, Tao, Friesz, Terry L., Liu, Hongcheng, 2012. Dynamic congestion pricing with demand uncertainty: A robust optimization approach.
Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 46 (10), 1504–1518.
Du, Lili, Han, Lanshan, Chen, Shuwei, 2015. Coordinated online in-vehicle routing balancing user optimality and system optimality through information
perturbation. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 79, 121–133.
Emmerink, Richard H.M., Nijkamp, Peter, Rietveld, Piet, Van Ommeren, Jos N., 1996. Variable message signs and radio traffic information: An integrated
empirical analysis of drivers’ route choice behaviour. Transp. Res. Part A: Policy Pr. 30 (2), 135–153.
Erke, Alena, Sagberg, Fridulv, Hagman, Rolf, 2007. Effects of route guidance variable message signs (VMS) on driver behaviour. Transp. Res. Part F: Traffic
Psychol. Behav. 10 (6), 447–457.
Fujimoto, Scott, Hoof, Herke, Meger, David, 2018. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, pp. 1587–1596.
Haarnoja, Tuomas, Zhou, Aurick, Hartikainen, Kristian, Tucker, George, Ha, Sehoon, Tan, Jie, Kumar, Vikash, Zhu, Henry, Gupta, Abhishek, Abbeel, Pieter, et
al., 2018. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905.
Han, Yu, Hegyi, Andreas, Zhang, Le, He, Zhengbing, Chung, Edward, Liu, Pan, 2022a. A new reinforcement learning-based variable speed limit control
approach to improve traffic efficiency against freeway jam waves. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. (ISSN: 0968090X) 144 (September), http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2022.103900.
Han, Yu, Wang, Meng, Li, Linghui, Roncoli, Claudio, Gao, Jinda, Liu, Pan, 2022b. A physics-informed reinforcement learning-based strategy for local and
coordinated ramp metering. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. (ISSN: 0968090X) 137 (February), 103584. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2022.103584.
Haydari, Ammar, Yilmaz, Yasin, 2022. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Intelligent Transportation Systems: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ISSN:
15580016) 23 (1), 11–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2020.3008612, arXiv:2005.00935.
Jacob, Celine, Abdulhai, Baher, 2006. Automated adaptive traffic corridor control using reinforcement learning: Approach and case studies. Transp. Res. Rec.
1959 (1), 1–8.
Jayasooriya, S.A.C.S., Bandara, YMMS, 2017. Measuring the economic costs of traffic congestion. In: Engineering Research Conference (MERCon), 2017 Moratuwa.
IEEE, pp. 141–146.
Jin, Wen-Long, 2021. A link queue model of network traffic flow. Transp. Sci. 55 (2), 436–455.
Kachroo, Pushkin, Özbay, Kaan, 1998. Solution to the user equilibrium dynamic traffic routing problem using feedback linearization. Transp. Res. Part B:
Methodol. 32 (5), 343–360.
Ke, Zemian, Li, Zhibin, Cao, Zehong, Liu, Pan, 2020. Enhancing transferability of deep reinforcement learning-based variable speed limit control using transfer
learning. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22 (7), 4684–4695.
Ke, Zemian, Qian, Sean, 2023. Leveraging ride-hailing services for social good: Fleet optimal routing and system optimal pricing. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg.
Technol. 155, 104284.
Kullman, Nicholas D., Cousineau, Martin, Goodson, Jorge E., 2022. Dynamic ride-hailing with electric vehicles. Transp. Sci. 56 (3), 775–794.
Lazar, Daniel A., Bıyık, Erdem, Sadigh, Dorsa, Pedarsani, Ramtin, 2021. Learning how to dynamically route autonomous vehicles on shared roads. Transp. Res.
Part C: Emerg. Technol. (ISSN: 0968090X) 130 (June), 103258. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2021.103258, arXiv:1909.03664.
Li, Zhenning, Yu, Hao, Zhang, Guohui, Dong, Shangjia, Xu, Cheng-Zhong, 2021. Network-wide traffic signal control optimization using a multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 125, 103059.
Lighthill, Michael James, Whitham, Gerald Beresford, 1955. On kinematic waves II. A theory of traffic flow on long crowded roads. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A.
Math. Phys. Sci. 229 (1178), 317–345.
Lillicrap, Timothy P., Hunt, Jonathan J., Pritzel, Alexander, Heess, Nicolas, Erez, Tom, Tassa, Yuval, Silver, David, Wierstra, Daan, 2015. Continuous control
with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971.
Liu, Pengkun, Liu, Jiepeng, Feng, Liang, Wu, Wenbo, Lan, Hao, 2020b. Automated clash free rebar design in precast concrete exterior wall via generative
adversarial network and multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Software and Systems Engineering: Proceedings of the
AHFE 2019 International Conference on Human Factors in Artificial Intelligence and Social Computing, the AHFE International Conference on Human Factors,
Software, Service and Systems Engineering, and the AHFE International Conference of Human Factors in Energy, July 24-28, 2019, Washington DC, USA
10. Springer, pp. 546–558.
Liu, Jiepeng, Liu, Pengkun, Feng, Liang, Wu, Wenbo, Li, Dongsheng, Chen, Y Frank, 2020a. Automated clash resolution for reinforcement steel design in concrete
frames via Q-learning and building information modeling. Autom. Constr. 112, 103062.
Liu, Pengkun, Qi, Hongtuo, Liu, Jiepeng, Feng, Liang, Li, Dongsheng, Guo, Jingjing, 2023. Automated clash resolution for reinforcement steel design in precast
concrete wall panels via generative adversarial network and reinforcement learning. Adv. Eng. Informatics 58, 102131.
Ma, Wei, Pi, Xidong, Qian, Sean, 2020. Estimating multi-class dynamic origin-destination demand through a forward-backward algorithm on computational
graphs. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 119, 102747.
Messmer, Albert, Papageorgiou, Markos, Mackenzie, Neil, 1998. Automatic control of variable message signs in the interurban scottish highway network. Transp.
Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 6 (3), 173–187.
Mnih, Volodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Silver, David, Rusu, Andrei A., Veness, Joel, Bellemare, Marc G., Graves, Alex, Riedmiller, Martin, Fidjeland, Andreas K.,
Ostrovski, Georg, et al., 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518 (7540), 529–533.
Muñoz, Juan Carlos, Laval, Jorge A., 2006. System optimum dynamic traffic assignment graphical solution method for a congested freeway and one destination.
Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. (ISSN: 0191-2615) 40 (1), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2005.01.001, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S019126150500007X.
Nguyen, Hai, Baisero, Andrea, Wang, Dian, Amato, Christopher, Platt, Robert, 2022. Leveraging fully observable policies for learning under partial observability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01991.
Nie, Yu, 2006. A variational inequality approach for inferring dynamic origin-destination travel demands (Ph.D. thesis). University of California, Davis.
Nie, Yu Marco, Zhang, H. Michael, 2010. Solving the dynamic user optimal assignment problem considering queue spillback. Netw. Spat. Econ. 10 (1), 49–71.
23

Transportation Research Part C 173 (2025) 105040

Z. Ke et al.

Ouyang, Long, Wu, Jeffrey, Jiang, Xu, Almeida, Diogo, Wainwright, Carroll, Mishkin, Pamela, Zhang, Chong, Agarwal, Sandhini, Slama, Katarina, Ray, Alex, et
al., 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 27730–27744.
Pandey, Venktesh, Wang, Evana, Boyles, Stephen D., 2020. Deep reinforcement learning algorithm for dynamic pricing of express lanes with multiple access
locations. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 119, 102715.
Parvez Farazi, Nahid, Zou, Bo, Ahamed, Tanvir, Barua, Limon, 2021. Deep reinforcement learning in transportation research: A review. Transp. Res. Interdiscip.
Perspect. (ISSN: 25901982) 11 (July), 100425. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2021.100425.
Paz, Alexander, Peeta, Srinivas, 2009. Behavior-consistent real-time traffic routing under information provision. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 17 (6),
642–661.
Pi, Xidong, Qian, Zhen Sean, 2017. A stochastic optimal control approach for real-time traffic routing considering demand uncertainties and travelers’ choice
heterogeneity. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 104, 710–732.
Prashanth, L.A., Bhatnagar, Shalabh, 2010. Reinforcement learning with function approximation for traffic signal control. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 12 (2),
412–421.
Qian, Zhen Sean, Shen, Wei, Zhang, H.M., 2012. System-optimal dynamic traffic assignment with and without queue spillback: Its path-based formulation and
solution via approximate path marginal cost. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 46 (7), 874–893.
Qian, Zhen, Zhang, H. Michael, 2011. Computing individual path marginal cost in networks with queue spillbacks. Transp. Res. Rec. 2263 (1), 9–18.
Qu, Xiaobo, Zhang, Jin, Wang, Shuaian, 2017. On the stochastic fundamental diagram for freeway traffic: Model development, analytical properties, validation,
and extensive applications. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 104, 256–271.
Richards, Paul I., 1956. Shock waves on the highway. Oper. Res. 4 (1), 42–51.
Schulman, John, Wolski, Filip, Dhariwal, Prafulla, Radford, Alec, Klimov, Oleg, 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
Shenfeld, Idan, Hong, Zhang-Wei, Tamar, Aviv, Agrawal, Pulkit, 2023. Tgrl: An algorithm for teacher guided reinforcement learning. In: International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 31077–31093.
Singh, Ashutosh, Al-Abbasi, Abubakr, Aggarwal, Vaneet, 2019. A reinforcement learning based algorithm for multi-hop ride-sharing: Model-free approach. In:
Neural Information Processing Systems (Neurips) Workshop. vol. 36.
Sutton, Richard S., Barto, Andrew G., 1998. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. vol. 1, MIT Press.
Tan, Zhen, Gao, H. Oliver, 2018. Hybrid model predictive control based dynamic pricing of managed lanes with multiple accesses. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol.
112, 113–131.
Toledo, Tomer, Mansour, Omar, Haddad, Jack, 2015. Simulation-based optimization of HOT lane tolls. Transp. Res. Procedia 6, 189–197.
Waller, S. Travis, Schofer, Joseph L., Ziliaskopoulos, Athanasios K, 2001. Evaluation with traffic assignment under demand uncertainty. Transp. Res. Rec. 1771
(1), 69–74.
Walsman, Aaron, Zhang, Muru, Choudhury, Sanjiban, Fox, Dieter, Farhadi, Ali, 2022. Impossibly good experts and how to follow them. In: The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Wang, Yibing, Papageorgiou, Markos, Messmer, Albert, 2001. Feedback and iterative routing strategies for freeway networks. In: Control Applications,
2001.(CCA’01). Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1162–1167.
Watkins, Christopher John Cornish Hellaby, 1989. Learning from Delayed Rewards. (PhD thesis). Cambridge University, Cambridge, England.
Weihs, Luca, Jain, Unnat, Liu, Iou-Jen, Salvador, Jordi, Lazebnik, Svetlana, Kembhavi, Aniruddha, Schwing, Alex, 2021. Bridging the imitation gap by adaptive
insubordination. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 34, 19134–19146.
Wunderlich, Karl E., Kaufman, David E., Smith, Robert L., 2000. Link travel time prediction for decentralized route guidance architectures. IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 1 (1), 4–14.
Xu, Te, 2023. Boosting Max-Pressure Signal Control into Practical Implementation: Methodologies and Simulation Studies in City Networks (Ph.D. thesis).
University of Minnesota.
Xu, Te, Barman, Simanta, Levin, Michael W, Chen, Rongsheng, Li, Tianyi, 2022. Integrating public transit signal priority into max-pressure signal control:
Methodology and simulation study on a downtown network. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 138, 103614.
Xu, Te, Bika, Yashveer, Levin, Michael W., 2024. Ped-mp: A pedestrian-friendly max-pressure signal control policy for city networks. J. Transp. Eng. Part A:
Syst. 150 (7), 04024028.
Yang, Mofeng, Li, Zhibin, Ke, Zemian, Li, Meng, 2019. A deep reinforcement learning-based ramp metering control framework for improving traffic operation
at freeway weaving sections. In: Proceedings of 98th Annual Meeting of Transportation Research Board.
Yang, Hai, Meng, Qiang, 1998. Departure time, route choice and congestion toll in a queuing network with elastic demand. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 32
(4), 247–260.
Yang, Ruichao, Wang, Xiting, Jin, Yiqiao, Li, Chaozhuo, Lian, Jianxun, Xie, Xing, 2022. Reinforcement subgraph reasoning for fake news detection. In: Proceedings
of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 2253–2262.
Ye, Yingjun, Zhang, Xiaohui, Sun, Jian, 2019. Automated vehicle’s behavior decision making using deep reinforcement learning and high-fidelity simulation
environment. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 107, 155–170.
Zhang, Jinghan, Wang, Xiting, Jin, Yiqiao, Chen, Changyu, Zhang, Xinhao, Liu, Kunpeng, 2024. Prototypical reward network for data-efficient RLHF. In: ACL.
Zhao, Ling, Li, Zhibin, Ke, Zemian, Li, Meng, 2020. Fuzzy self-adaptive proportional–integral–derivative control strategy for ramp metering at distance downstream
bottlenecks. IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 14 (4), 250–256.
Zhu, Meixin, Wang, Xuesong, Wang, Yinhai, 2018. Human-like autonomous car-following model with deep reinforcement learning. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg.
Technol. 97, 348–368.

24

