Emergency vehicle rescue route optimization based on deep
reinforcement learning in highway network

Linwei Li1, Qishu He1, Rui Luo3, Nan Chen2, Peng Gao1*
1
School of Electronics and Control Engineering, Chang’an University, Shaanxi, Xi’an 710064,
China
2
School of Information Engineering, Chang'an University, Shaanxi, Xi’an 710064, China
3
Guangdong Road & Bridge Construction Development Co., Ltd., Guangzhou China
*Corresponding author: penggao@chd.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Rescue route planning for emergency vehicles (EVs) is one of the most important tasks for emergency response. However,
traditional methods face challenges in addressing the complex information in modern traffic environments. To ensure the
prompt arrival of EVs, this paper proposes a deep reinforcement learning-based method to optimize the rescue routes of
EVs on the highway. Specifically, to align with the emergency transportation business, an emergency transportation map
based on the road network node graph is first constructed. To improve the convergence speed of the algorithm, the action
masking technique is applied to reduce the dimension of the action space during the decision-making of the agent to avoid
invalid exploration. Additionally, to help the agent learn the spatio-temporal benefits throughout the entire dispatch cycle,
road network nodes are prioritized based on the spatial transfer scale, and a corresponding reward scheme is designed.
These improvements, when combined with the agent's learning mechanism, can assist them optimize rescue routes in a
more efficient action space. Validation is carried out through simulation examples, and the results show that the approach
presented in this paper can find the shortest time-consuming rescue route. Furthermore, the proposed improvements
enhance the convergence performance of the algorithm.
Keyword: emergency vehicle, route optimization, reinforcement learning, emergency transportation support

1. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of the economy and society, the highway, serving as an important transportation link
connecting various regions, ushered in a boom construction and usage. While greatly enhancing daily life convenience,
the highway network also faces various potential risks, especially the negative impacts of non-occasional accidents [1].
According to an analysis of the US fatality dataset, a delayed rescue significantly reduces the likelihood of survival for
individuals affected by the disaster [2]. Therefore, it is critical to improve the efficiency of emergency rescue.
Emergency rescue on the highway requires rapid configuration and scheduling of EVs, with the planning of a dependable
and efficient route being one of its primary objectives [3]. Previously, scholars commonly employed classical algorithms in
Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) such as Dijkstra and A* algorithms to address the path problem in the emergency
response process [4]. However, traditional planning algorithms struggle to handle complex and dynamic traffic
environments, significantly impacting their efficiency. In recent years, the ongoing evolution of artificial intelligence
technology has provided more comprehensive solutions for optimizing the rescue routes of EVs. Many novel methods
have been applied, resulting in improved outcomes. Ding et al. [5] introduced a route optimization framework for EVs
based on vehicle-road cooperative technology to help EVs reach quickly. Min et al. [6] developed an urban traffic routing
algorithm for EVs, aiming to find a route with the highest time reliability. Nikoo et al. [7] introduced a mixed-integer linear
programming model to select the optimal network for determining the routes of EVs. Notably, reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms have proven effective in addressing route-planning challenges in recent years due to their unique learning
mechanism, allowing them to deal with more complicated traffic information [8]. Bdeir et al. [9] proposed an RP-DQN
algorithm to address the Multiple Depot Vehicle Routing Problem (MDVRP). Elfahim et al. [10] utilized the Q-learning
algorithm to train an agent to find the shortest rescue path in a grid graph.
Currently, although RL algorithms have shown effectiveness in addressing route-planning challenges, practical
implementation still faces several obstacles. Firstly, the training environment lacks accuracy. EVs are prioritized during
emergencies, and the traffic network is also usually set up with emergency lanes, openings and other special access, which

Eighth International Conference on Traffic Engineering and Transportation System
(ICTETS 2024), edited by Xiantao Xiao, Jia Yao, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421,
134215S · © 2024 SPIE · 0277-786X · doi: 10.1117/12.3054495
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-1

brings a lot of convenience to the rescue route planning for EVs. However, the grid training environment employed by
most scholars is unable to simulate accurate emergency transportation maps. Secondly, the complex road network
environment results in increased information inputs that require large-scale computational resources, while RL algorithms
commonly face challenges related to convergence difficulties and unstable convergence, especially in high-dimensional
spaces.
In this paper, we utilize the Double-DQN algorithm to train an agent to optimize emergency rescue routes. The agent learns
road network information and route planning skills from its environment and rewards, enabling it to discover better route
options. This learning-driven approach excels at handling complex transportation environment information and can be
implemented immediately after training. To overcome the convergence difficulties of the algorithms in high-dimensional
action spaces, we employ an action masking technique to ensure that the agent explores within a valid action space.
Meanwhile, we use the spatial transfer scale to categorize and prioritize road network nodes, and propose a reward function
scheme that accounts for spatial and temporal benefits to guide the agent. The implementation of this reward scheme has
enhanced the convergence performance of the algorithm and scheme benefits. Finally, to simulate a realistic emergency
traffic environment, we constructed a road network node graph for the experiment. The experimental results verify the
effectiveness of the method proposed in this paper, which significantly shortens the time-consuming rescue route.
Furthermore, the improvement measures adopted in this paper also speed up the convergence speed and enhance the
convergence stability.

2. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
2.1 Reinforcement learning process
Reinforcement learning is a machine learning algorithm based on rewards and trial-and-error, which has been widely used
in various fields such as transportation and energy in recent years [8]. Specifically, the agent interacts with the environment
to gather information, determines the current state st , selects an action at based on the action selection strategy, executes
the action, receives a new state st 1 and an immediate reward rt from the environment, and updates the action selection
strategy based on that feedback. This iterative learning process is illustrated in Figure 1.
Agent
Action
At

Reward
Rt

State
St

Rt 1

Environment

St 1

Figure 1. Reinforcement learning process.

Reinforcement learning can be classified into model-based and model-free approaches based on whether the state transition
function is known. Model-free approaches can be categorized into two groups based on their learning objectives: valuebased and policy-based. Q-learning is a classical value-based RL algorithm that operates without requiring explicit models
[11]
. The Q-learning algorithm constructs a Q-table by computing Q-values for specific states and actions, iteratively
updating the Q-table using Bellman's equation to maximize future rewards, and ultimately selecting the action with the
highest Q-value to determine the optimal strategy for solving the RL problem.
2.2 Deep reinforcement learning
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) combines the strengths of deep learning and RL algorithms to perform exceptionally
well in handling high-dimensional perceptual inputs, large action spaces, and complex environments. The DQN algorithm
proposed by Google's DeepMind team is a representative achievement in the field of DRL research [12].
DQN is the result of integrating Q-learning algorithms with deep learning, utilizing neural networks to approximate Qfunctions and freeing the algorithm from the spatial constraints of Q-table. The DQN algorithm possesses two important
features: the target network and the replay buffer. These components respectively improve the stability and training
efficiency of the algorithm.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-2

3. METHODOLOGY
3.1 Emergency transportation road network construction
This paper utilizes a network node graph G   N , E to represent the highway emergency road network, based on the
concept of constructing an emergency transportation map. N is the set of intersection nodes, and E is the set of roads
(edges) connecting two intersection nodes. Using random seeds to control the amount and length of edges ensures that the
agent is trained in a consistent environment. The length of each edge represents the length of the road section. Assuming
that the estimated travel time of a road section is positively correlated with its length, we can derive the set of estimated
time
 {teE } . During training, the agent learns to find the fastest route to the destination based
travel times for edges weightedges
on environmental information and reward guidance. The states and actions are defined as follows, and the reward function
scheme is described in section 3.2.
(1) State: accurate and effective state parameter descriptions can enhance the agent's understanding of the environment
and improve learning. In the route planning task within the highway scenario, the location data and the estimated travel
time are the most essential information for the navigation of EVs. Therefore, in this paper, the state is defined as follows:
time

S (t step )   x, y , weightedges

(1)

where tstep denotes the current time step, x is the horizontal coordinate of the node where the vehicle is located, and y is
the vertical coordinate. The dimension of this state is E  2 .
(2) Action: the action refers to the next node selected by the agent from the current node, and its dimension is determined
by the number of nodes. We consider all nodes of the graph as the action and apply the action masking technique. Using
this technique reduces the dimensionality of the action space and guides the agent to search within the range of effective
nodes:

A  N  {n0 , n1 , n2 ,...nm }

(2)

Amask  {True or False}m1

(3)

where Amask is the set of action mask, which share the same dimensions as the action set A . The node connected to the
current node is coded as True , otherwise False . The set of action mask is updated each time step and the intelligent agent
only selects actions with a value of True .
3.2 Node priority
The essence of the route planning task is to transfer from the current spatial location to the target spatial location, and there
are different time-consuming schemes for the transfer process affected by the traffic state and other factors. So, we aim to
ensure that each movement of EVs brings it closer to the target location while minimizing the total time taken to reach the
destination.
Starting from the original point, each node in the road network is mapped onto the standard coordinate system. The spatial
differences between various nodes are expressed in terms of horizontal spatial transfer scale ( Hsts ) and vertical spatial
transfer scale ( Vsts ) as follows:

Hstsn, n '  xn'  xn

(4)

Vstsn, n '  yn'  yn

(5)

where Hstsn , n ' is a vector representing the horizontal spatial transfer scale for moving from node n to n ' , obtained by
subtracting node n ' ’ horizontal coordinate from node n ’s horizontal coordinate, and Vstsn , n ' is the same. As a result, the
horizontal and vertical spatial perspectives can be utilized to assess whether moving from node n to node n ' decreases
the spatial distance from the target node, as illustrated in Figure 2 (a).

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-3

( x* , y* )

n

Vstsn,n*

Optimal search
range

Suboptimal search range

Vstsn ,n*

n

( x* , y * )

(0, y * )

*

destination

0

original point

n0

( x * , 0)

(0,0)

( x* ,0)

Hstsn ,n*

( x * , 0)

Invalid search range

Hstsn ,n*

Suboptimal search range

0

(0,  y* )

(a)
Figure 2. Node spatial relationships: (a) spatial transfer scale, (b) node priority range.

(b)

Nodes are categorized into three types based on the spatial benefits of moving to different nodes, corresponding to three
search priorities as depicted in Table 1. The range of different of nodes is shown in Figure 2 (b).
Table 1. Explanation of node categorization and prioritization.
Priority
1

Node Category
Optimal search range

Benefits

Restrictive Condition

Horizontal and
Vertical scales

 Hstsn, n '  Hstsn0 , n*  0 and Vstsn, n '  Vstsn0 , n*  0


 Hstsn , n '  Hstsn0 , n* and Vstsn, n '  Vstsn0 , n*
Hstsn, n '  Hstsn , n*  0 and Hstsn , n '  Hstsn , n*

2

Suboptimal search
range

0

Horizontal or
Vertical scales

0

or
Vstsn, n '  Vstsn , n*  0 and Vstsn , n '  Vstsn , n*
0

3

Invalid search range

None

0

Else

The reward serves as the central component in RL, directing the function approximation process, which is the primary
focus of learning of the agent. This paper proposes reward schemes with temporal and spatial benefits by combining node
prioritization, evaluating spatial benefits at each step, and temporal benefits upon task completion:
(1) Long-term temporal reward: the time-based long-term reward mechanism can estimate the long-term cumulative
benefits of a route, thereby preventing agents from solely focusing on short-term gains when making decisions. This reward
helps avoid vehicles traveling on congested roads. The total time used by the agent in a training round is utilized as a
negative reward to guide it in finding a route that minimizes time spent. The calculation formula is as follows:
k
time
rtime
_ transfer   weight s , s '

(6)

k
Rtime _ transfer   k  0  k  rtime
_ transfer

(7)

K

k
'
where rtime
_ transfer represents the time step of k , the temporal reward for passing through edge ( s , s ) ; Rtime _ transfer is the

cumulative temporal reward, and  is the discount rate.
(2) Immediate spatial reward: rewards are given based on node priority after each action. This reward mechanism
encourages the agent to select nodes with higher priority, hastening its approach to the destination while mitigating the
issue of reward delay caused by focusing solely on long-term rewards.
 2,

Rspace _ transfer  1,
 2,


Optimal search range
Suboptimal search range
Invalid search range

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-4

(8)

In summary, the total reward function is:
R   Rtime _ transfer  (1   ) Rspace _ transfer

(9)

 is used to reconcile long-term temporal reward with immediate spatial reward, with values in the range (0,1).
3.3 Route optimization method based on Double-DQN
In the route planning task, the pathfinding agent can gain a deeper understanding of the road network and navigating skills
by interacting with the environment and following the guidance of the reward function. This approach effectively addresses
the information limitations inherent in traditional methods within modern complex transportation environments. Therefore,
we employ Double-DQN, a variant of the classic DRL algorithm DQN, to train a pathfinding agent.
The DQN algorithm utilizes the Temporal Difference (TD) technique to update the network parameters during training,
with the TD-target defined as follows:
Y DQN  r    max a Q ( s ' , a ' ; w)

(10)

where Y DQN is the target value and w is the value network parameter. Q ( s ' , a ' ; w) indicates the target Q-value of the next
state. The loss function is as follows:

1
L  [Y DQN  Q( s, a; w)]2
2

(11)

Q(s, a; w) indicates the current Q-value. The gradient is obtained by taking the derivative of the loss function, and the
parameters of the value network are updated using a gradient descent algorithm. However, DQN algorithms frequently
face the overestimation problem. To address this issue, Hasselt proposed the Double-DQN algorithm, which effectively
mitigates overestimation [13]. The Double-DQN algorithm uses a value network to select actions and a target network to
compute Q-values. Thus, given the target network does the evaluation, even if a more significant overestimation issue
arises for a specific action chosen by the value network, the final Q-value for that action will not be overestimated. The
method used to compute the TD target is the only difference between the Double DQN and DQN algorithms:
Y DoubleDQN  r    Q ( s ' , arg max a ( s ' , a ' , w); w  )

(12)

where w is the target network parameter. To train the DRL agent, we use components such as the replay buffer of the
DQN to improve the learning efficiency, while at the same time computing the Q-value to alleviate the overestimation
problem by the mechanism of the Double-DQN algorithm. The optimization framework is shown in Figure 3.
ENV

Loss Function

Emergency transportation road network
update w

arg max a ( s ' , a ' , w)

Q-Network

s

Regular
update w

( s, a )

State
( x, y )

Action
time
weightedges

Amask

max a Q( s ' , a ' ; w )

Q( s, a; w)

Target-Network
s'

r

Reward
( s , a, r , s ' )

Node priority...

Replay Buffer

Figure 3. Rescue route optimization framework.

The advantages of a DRL-based optimization framework include: (a) the agent can acquire further knowledge about the
road network by interacting with the environment, and it can also precisely grasp the essential requirements of the route
planning task by setting reasonable rewards; (b) the agent can make decisions immediately after training, contrasting with
traditional methods that face limitations and time delays due to various constraints.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-5

4. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
4.1 Sensitivity analysis
To assess the influence of the suggested hyperparameters  , experiments are conducted using the shortest route time and
convergence rounds as performance metrics. Nine groups of parameter values were set within the range (0,1),
corresponding to   0.1, 0.2,..., 0.9 . Each set of experiments' results represents the average of ten training sessions. Figure
4 displays the sensitivity results of  .

Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis results.

The figure indicates that when   0.5 , equal weight is assigned to the temporal benefit and spatial benefit, resulting in
the shortest time for the rescue route. When   0.7 , the temporal benefits are given greater weight, leading to faster
convergence, although this also results in increased route time consumption. Given the time-critical nature of emergencies,
set   0.5 .
4.2 Performance of proposed approach
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method and highlight the advantages of the reward scheme, the agent is
trained to identify the shortest time-consuming rescue routes in the node graph. The algorithms' performance is also
compared between learning only temporal rewards and learning both temporal and spatial rewards. The experiments were
conducted using Python 3.8 and executed on a computational processing platform equipped with a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core
(TM) i5-13600KF processor running at 3.50 GHz with 16GB of RAM. Other parameter settings include a learning rate of
0.001, a discount rate of 0.9, a final task reward of 100, a replay buffer size of 1000, and an exponential decrease in the
greedy coefficient from 0.99 to 0.01. The agent is trained for 500 epochs to maximize rewards and minimize time
consumption, and the results are depicted in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Algorithm Performance: (a) convergence performance, (b) route optimization capabilities.

The algorithm's convergence performance is measured regarding reward per epoch, while the route time is utilized to
assess the agent's ability to find rescue routes. Figure 5 shows the reward and route time converge within 100 epochs,

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-6

demonstrating the effectiveness of the action masking technique we employ and the reward scheme proposed in this paper.
Notably, removing immediate spatial reward results in a slight decrease in the algorithm's convergence rate and an increase
in route time. Conversely, adding it improves the algorithm's convergence stability, obtaining a rescue route scheme that
consumes less time. That's because when only long-term temporal reward is present, the agent focuses on a single learning
goal, leading to faster convergence. However, when immediate spatial reward is added, the agent learns additional
topological features of the road network while balancing spatio-temporal benefit, resulting in a more optimal solution. We
conducted ten rescue route optimizations using the agent trained with the two reward schemes, respectively. The most
frequent test results are presented in Table 2. The table shows that the rescue route scheme, which combines temporal and
spatial reward, outperforms the scheme that relies solely on temporal reward in terms of both route time and reward. This
result reveals the strength and significant potential of our approach, which allows the agent to learn to optimize routes. As
the agent acquires more knowledge, the resulting strategy improves accordingly.
Table 2. Configuration and test results.
Reward function
Long-term temporal reward and
Immediate spatial reward

Number of
nodes

Number of
edges

OD

100

1839

0→99

Long-term temporal reward

Route

Route
time

Reward

0→83→99

2

97.54

0→12→45→99

3.5

91.62

5. CONCLUSION
We propose a DRL-based approach to optimize rescue routes for EVs on highways. The advantage of this method is that
it can handle more complex road network information to adapt to the modern transportation environment. As the agent
acquires more knowledge, its strategies become increasingly optimal, showcasing substantial potential. We developed a
node-graph-based emergency transportation map and subsequently trained the agent using the Double-DQN algorithm.
The training process utilizes the action masking technique and our newly devised reward scheme to improve the
convergence performance of the algorithm and the pathfinding capability of the agent. We tested the agent in a simulated
emergency transportation node map containing 100 nodes. The results show that the method successfully optimizes the
rescue path and finds out the shortest time-consuming rescue route. Moreover, the proposed improvements enhance the
algorithm's performance.

REFERENCES
[1] Tan, E, Liu, B, Luan, S, Ma, X, & Zhang, Z. (2023). Evaluating Road Network Resilience under Recurring and
Non-Recurring Incidents. CICTP 2023, 659–669. https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784485040.064.
[2] Ma, L, Zhang, H, Yan, X, Wang, J, Song, Z, & Xiong, H. (2019). Smooth associations between the emergency
medical services response time and the risk of death in road traffic crashes. Journal of transport & health. (12-),
12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2018.08.011.
[3] Li, L, Jin, Y, Gao, P, Wang, L, & Liu, L. (2024). Reliability Analysis of Highway Network Travel Time Based on
Information Entropy Model and Electronic Toll Collection Data. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, https://doi.org/10.1177/03611981241230537
[4] Chen, Y, Shen, S, Chen, T, & Yang, R. (2014). Path Optimization Study for Vehicles Evacuation based on Dijkstra
Algorithm. Procedia Engineering, 71, 159–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.04.023.
[5] Ding, L, Zhao, D, Wang, Z, Wang, G, Tan, C, Fan, L, & Ma, H. (2023). Learning to Help Emergency Vehicles
Arrive Faster: A Cooperative Vehicle-Road Scheduling Approach. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
22(10), 5949–5962. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2022.3188344.
[6] Min, W, Yu, L, Chen, P, Zhang, M, Liu, Y, & Wang, J. (2020). On-Demand Greenwave for Emergency Vehicles
in a Time-Varying Road Network With Uncertainties. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
21(7), 3056–3068. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2019.2923802.
[7] Nikoo, N, Babaei, M, & Mohaymany, A. S. (2018). Emergency transportation network design problem:
Identification and evaluation of disaster response routes. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 27, 7–
20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.07.003.

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-7

[8] Koh, S, Zhou, B, Fang, H, Yang, P, Yang, Z, Yang, Q, Guan, L, & Ji, Z. (2020). Real-time deep reinforcement
learning
based
vehicle
navigation.
Applied
Soft
Computing,
96,
106694.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106694
[9] Bdeir, A, Boeder, S, Dernedde, T, Tkachuk, K, Falkner, J. K, & Schmidt-Thieme, L. (2021). RP-DQN: An
application of Q-Learning to Vehicle Routing Problems. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.12226
[10] Elfahim, O, Laoula, E. M. B, Youssfi, M, Barakat, O, & Mestari, M. (2021). Reinforcement Learning-based
Unpredictable Emergency Events. 2021 Fifth International Conference On Intelligent Computing in Data
Sciences (ICDS), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDS53782.2021.9626720.
[11] Watkins, C. J. C. H, & Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8(3-4), 279-292.
[12] Mnih, V, Kavukcuoglu, K, Silver, D, Rusu, A. A, Veness, J, Bellemare, M. G, Graves, A, Riedmiller, M, Fidjeland,
A. K, Ostrovski, G, Petersen, S, Beattie, C, Sadik, A, Antonoglou, I, King, H, Kumaran, D, Wierstra, D, Legg, S,
& Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540), 529–533.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
[13] van Hasselt, H, Guez, A, & Silver, D. (2015). Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-learning. arXiv.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06461

Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13421 134215S-8

