International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Autonomous Vehicle Routing Optimization in a Competitive Environment: A
Reinforcement Learning Application
Alireza Mostafizi1; Mohammad Rayeedul Kalam Siam2; and Haizhong Wang, Ph.D.3

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

1

Oregon State Univ., Dept. of Civil and Construction Engineering, Corvallis, OR 97331. E-mail:
mostafia@oregonstate.edu
2
Oregon State Univ., Dept. of Civil and Construction Engineering, Corvallis, OR 97331. E-mail:
siamm@oregonstate.edu
3
Oregon State Univ., Dept. of Civil and Construction Engineering, Corvallis, OR 97331. E-mail:
haizhong.wang@oregonstate.edu
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a multiagent approach to identify the shortest path for the intelligent
agents (i.e., autonomous vehicles) traveling through the transportation network using a Qlearning algorithm. In addition, this paper discusses how a machine achieves an optimal solution
in the case that there are a large number of intelligent agents trying to minimize their travel times
simultaneously. The Q-learning algorithm with a reverse order Q matrix is updated to reach the
optimal path within a grid network, during which different coefficients have been evaluated and
analyzed based on their impact on the algorithm’s performance. The reinforcement learning
algorithm is then applied to the multiagent system with different market penetration of
autonomous vehicle agents. The results revealed that as the percentage of intelligent agents
increases, it is more difficult to converge to an optimal solution. A physical interpretation is that
when all of the agents are trying to maximize their utility, and if the intelligent agents have
conflicted interests with each other, the system does not converge to a global optimum. We
found that the final converged total travel time reaches its minimum when 75% of the agents are
intelligent autonomous vehicles. The critical threshold lies between 50% and 75%, below which
the system performance improves marginally over time.
1. INTRODUCTION
The escalating advancement of information and communications technology (ICT), the
internet of things (IoTs), and the automation have had a significant influence on the landscape of
transportation. These technologies have given rise to the prospect of autonomous vehicle (AV)
technology which aims to improve traffic performance in terms of safety, mobility, and
environmental impacts (Genders and Razavi 2015). The idea of driverless vehicles has been in
existence for decades; however, the exorbitant costs and the lack of proper technological
advancements have stalled its large-scale production (Fagnant and Kockelman 2015).
Nevertheless, an acceleration in the research and development efforts in the last decade has
brought the idea of the AV to realization. For example, the introduction of the Google car
brought AVs to the spotlight (Guizzo 2011, Markoff 2010). However, the existing literature does
not document the approaches by which AVs find and determine their routes in the road networks
(Bagloee et al., 2016). Real-time traffic information systems are considered as an effective
method to deliver messages to drivers and vehicles regarding the travel times as well as
upcoming incidents. This real-time communication capability between connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAV) as well as the infrastructure may be beneficial to the vehicles’
directionality abilities, leading to more efficient and intelligent route-finding algorithms

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

109

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

(Mostafizi et al, 2017). As a result, the future of autonomous vehicles, and routing behavior in
particular, relies on centralized control to a certain extent to fully utilize the transportation
network capacity. In this paper, the learning environment of the centralized control system is
replicated to find the shortest path for the intelligent agents travelling through a grid
transportation network using a Q-learning algorithm. The objectives of this paper are two-folded.
In the first part, the authors focused on replicating the behavior of the controller in terms of
learning the shortest path for a single intelligent vehicle in a simplified transportation grid
network with a background traffic. Later, the authors studied how different percentages of
intelligent vehicles impacts the total mobility of the whole system, measured by the average of
travel times.
In the remainder of the article, Section 2 briefly introduces the past research done on this
area. Section 3 contains the methodology that describes the formulation of both the individual
and the competitive learning environment. Section 4 discusses how a machine achieves an
optimal solution in the case that there are large number of intelligent agents trying to minimize
their travel times. Finally, Section 5 concludes the major findings of this work.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Connected and Autonomous Vehicle (CAV) systems coupled with vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) information exchange may introduce far-reaching impacts on
several levels on the current transportation arena such as demand and behavior side, traffic
mobility, as well as environmental relevant issues, and consequently, have attracted significant
attention from both academia and industry. Actual performance at the network level will echo
these new changes and will be greatly affected by the specific routing and scheduling algorithms
developed for both individual autonomous vehicles and for vehicle fleets. To address the above
notion, Du et al. (2015a) developed a coordinated routing mechanism that allows smart vehicles
to talk to each other so that they can make online routing decisions in real time; this strategy may
aid in avoiding probable traffic congestion to some degree. Later, Du et al. (2015b) extended the
work and developed a coordinated online in-vehicle routing mechanism that also accommodates
information perturbation. This work has some attractive features such that: (1) CV vehicles make
a routing coordination group based on their route choice; each smart vehicle in each group shares
traffic information including its route choice with other members; and (2) a control center that
collects and processes real-time information including general traffic condition, vehicles’
tentative route choice, and travel time prediction among vehicles in a connected environment.
This paper chooses reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm to define the quickest path for the
intelligent agents travelling along the transportation network. RL is a technique for learning
control strategies for autonomous agents from trial and error (Kaelbling et al. 1996, Sutton et al.,
1998). The agents interact with the environment to obtain information, and use resulting
feedback (reward and the consecutive state) to reinforce behavior that result in desired
conclusions. A lot of research (Littman and Boyan 1993, Baruah et al. 2004, Peshkin and Savova
2002) have successfully applied RL algorithm in the context of vehicle routing; however, this is
the first attempt, to the authors’ knowledge, to implement RL algorithm in a connected and
autonomous vehicle environment.
3. METHODOLOGY
This paper considers a network grid where nodes represent intersections and links represent
travel links. Nodes at the farthest left of the grid are the origins and the other side nodes are
© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

110

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

111

representing the destinations. In each origin, there are 50 agents whose destination is randomly
assigned to one of the destination nodes. Two types of agents are included: naïve (i.e.,
conventional vehicles) and intelligent (i.e., autonomous vehicles). Naïve agents have no
connection to the centralized control, and therefore choose their route based on the so-called
diagonal shortest path, calculated with the following pattern.
 6  D y )  /2 
dy
 6 Dy ) /2


 R..R RDRD..RDRD R..R
dy  0

Diagonal Shortest Route  
dy  0
 R..R RURU ..RURU R..R
 6 D y )  /2
 6 D y )  /2 

dy




where d y = YDestination  YOrigin , R represents Right action, D represents Down action, and U
represents Up action.
However, intelligent agents are connected to the controller that can provide them with the
shortest path. Therefore, for each agent travelling through this network, the route would be a
combination of certain “Right” actions and d y “Up” or “Down” actions, based on the sign of
dy .

As mentioned earlier, the contribution of the paper is formulated in two scenarios:
 Scenario I: How a centralized controlling system can learn the optimal shortest route for
an individual intelligent agent?
 Scenario II: How does this machine achieves an optimal solution in the case that there are
a large number of intelligent agents trying to minimize their travel times?
The general approach to optimize the route for the intelligent agents in this study is to exploit
the Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and Dayan 1992) with reverse updates to speed up the goalbased domain. The simulator was built in Netlogo (Wilensky, 1999) and agent-based modeling
was incorporated to replicate cars’ movement and speed synchronization as following:
 Speed of the front vehicle  deceleration If there is any vehicle in sight
Speed  
If the is no vehicle in sight
 Speed  acceleration
Where acceleration and deceleration are set to reflect the comfortable range of acceleration
and deceleration of passenger cars.
Since traffic congestions are simulated in the model and incorporated in the process of
learning, rewards were stochastic. Therefore, each trajectory was run 10 times and the average
rewards of each state were used to update the Q matrix. The learning approach is summarized
hereunder.
1. Start with all zeros initial Q Matrix
2. Take the action considering  greedy exploration exploitation policy
3. Collect the reward
4. Go back to step 2 until reaching the destination
5. Do the same trajectory 10 times
6. Update Q function in a reverse order based on the average observed rewards in 10 trials
of the same trajectory as following



Q  s, a   Q  s, a    R  s    Max ´ Q  ś, á   Q  s, a 
a



7. Go to 2: After trying 10 different trajectories, calculate and report the performance
measurement.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

In addition, to formulate this problem, three key features of reinforcement learning are
defined as following:
 States
Each intersection is known as a state.
 Actions
For the Scenario  , possible actions are D and R , regarding the network constraints.
This means that an agent cannot move outside the network. For the Scenario  , possible
actions are R , and either D or U (based on the sign of d y ), considering the constraint
that an agent cannot move outside the network. Also, an agent cannot pass its destination
vertically. This means that any sets of actions will take an agent to its own destination for
sure.
 Rewards
Since the objective is to find the “Shortest” path, reward of each state is based on the time
to get to that state from previous states, formulated as the following.
Reward  state    MaxTraveltime  Traveltime  state  *1000
where MaxTraveltime is calculated based on the link length and the minimum speed of the
vehicles. There also is a significant reward for the destination, based on the time it takes
to get to the destination from the origin, formulated as the following.
Final Reward   MaxTotal Traveltime  Total Traveltime  *1000
Where MaxTotal Traveltime is calculated based on Manhattan distance between origin and
destination and the minimum speed of the agents.

Figure 1. Background traffic pattern.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

112

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

SCENARIO I: INDIVIDUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
This paper considered two different network sizes, three by three and six by six, to reduce the
amount of computational needs, and prove the concept. In this scenario, all agents are naïve,
except one intelligent agent at the top left of the grid, heading to bottom right. Based on the
travel pattern proposed earlier and the diagonal shortest path algorithm defined, the expected
background traffic resembles Figure 1.
As shown in the Figure 1, the middle of the network is heavily congested, and thus, the
shortest path should avoid those links as much as possible. Therefore, the shortest path from the
top left to the bottom right is not the diagonal path, and it is more likely to be inclined to the
bottom left of the grid. Also, since vertical links are less congested in the beginning, it is
expected that the shortest path will be more vertical in the beginning and after that, it tries to get
to the destination by moving horizontally. To compare the impact of different coefficients, the
learning environment is set for two different network sizes, and for deferent values of β, α, and ϵ
for the epsilon greedy exploitation policy.
SCENARIO II: COMPETITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
In this scenario, the authors focused on having multiple agents to learn at the same time. As
aforementioned, there are 50 agents in each origin. However, a specific percentage of the agents
in each origin is set as intelligent agents in this scenario. The destinations are assigned randomly.
Definition of States and rewards are exactly the same as the first part. However, possible actions
are defined as the following.
If d y  0 , Possible Actions(state) =  RU 
If d y  0 , Possible Actions(state) =  R D
If d y  0 , Possible Actions(state) = { R}
It is assumed that an agent cannot travel outside the network. Also, an agent cannot pass its
destination vertically. Since the objective is to identify the optimal shortest path, logical
constraints are applied to ensure possible actions in a way that an agent reaches its destination for
sure, and to ensure that the simulation realized the learning potential for finding the shortest path.
The next section presents the results from both scenarios.

Figure 2. Learning curve for various ϵ (α=0.1 and β=0.99).

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

113

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

4. RESULTS

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

SCENARIO I: INDIVIDUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
The objective of the first scenario is to fine-tune the learning algorithm to ultimately deploy
on the multi-agent system with many intelligent agents learning simultaneously. Therefore, the
following figures show distinctive performances of the algorithm due to varying coefficients on a
3x3 grid network. Figure 2 shows the algorithm’s performance for diverse values for ϵ.
Considering the background traffic, the optimal route would be the one that starts from the
bottom left intersection, and due to the nature of the idealized grid network, it is hard to explore
the corners of the network. So, setting ϵ to 0.9, even though it makes the learning curve less
noisy, it would converge to the near-optimal route eventually but computationally intensive. On
the other hand, setting ϵ to be 0.1, this makes the learning curve very noisy, and a reliable
convergence to the optimal route is achieved almost at the same time as 0.9-greedy policy. In this
study, as convergence to the optimal policy is more important than the way of convergence and
the algorithm’s performance, for this reason, ϵ is set to be 0.5 which practically is a random
exploration policy.
Figure 3 represents how different discount factors affect the performance of the algorithm.
Since the rewards of each state are in line with the final reward, having a large β sometimes
makes the learning curves to be noisy. As can be seen in Figure 3, all three curves show that the
algorithm converged to the near-optimal route. However, β=0.99 converges in a noisier manner.
To ensure that the algorithm converges to the shortest route, β is set to 0.99 for the rest of
simulations.

Figure 3. Learning curve for various β (α=0.1 and ϵ=0.5).
Figure 4 presents the impact of different values of α on the algorithm’s performance. As
expected, the smaller the  is, the smoother the learning process would be.
Therefore, for the analysis in Scenario II, the coefficients are set to the following values:
α=0.1, β=0.99, and ϵ=0.5.
The final results in the first scenario is the sample of algorithm run for a six by six network.
As observed, similar to the smaller network, ϵ of 0.5 converges faster, but noisier, compared to
the other two. In addition, the final route that came from the algorithms is shown in Figure 6. As
expected, the optimal route is inclined to the bottom left part of the network.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

114

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Figure 4. Learning curve for various α (β=0.5 and ϵ=0.5).

Figure 5. Learning curve for various ϵ (α=0.1 and β=0.99).

Figure 6. Final optimal routes.
Scenario II: COMPETITIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
Figure 7 shows the evolution of total travel time when there are more than one intelligent
agent in the network. Of the all agents in the network (Naïve and Intelligent) for different
percentages (market penetration) of the intelligent agents, the final converged total travel times is
minimized when 75% of the agents are intelligent, not all of them. This suggests that as the
number of intelligent agents increase, a convergence to the optimal solution becomes harder or
even impossible. This is due to the fact that when all of the agents are trying to optimize their
utility function with conflicting interests between each other, reaching an optimal solution is
becoming infeasible. In this case, having 100% of intelligent agents is even worse than all other
three different scenarios. On another note, having intelligent agents improves the performance of
the system, compared to scenarios without any.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

115

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Figure 7. Total travel times for different percentage of intelligent agents.

Figure 8. Average travel time of intelligent agents.
Figure 8 presents the average travel time of the scenarios in which all agents are intelligent.
The results are interesting and informative. The learning curve of the intelligent agents for a
market penetration of 75% and 100% is deteriorating over the simulation horizon, instead of
improving. On the other hand, the system performance for a market penetration of 25% or 50 %
intelligent agents improves over simulation time. Therefore, it is reasonable to conjecture there
exists a critical threshold between 50% and 75%, above which the system performance
deteriorates, and below which the system performance improves over the simulation horizon.
5. CONCLUSION
This study consists of two major sections. Firstly, Q-learning algorithm with a reverse order
Q Matrix Update is applied to reach the optimal shortest path within a grid network from the top
left corner to the bottom right corner, during which different coefficients have been evaluated
and analyzed based on their impact on the algorithm’s performance. Secondly, a learning
algorithm is implemented to the multi-agent systems with different percentage of intelligent
agents. The results revealed that as the percentage of intelligent agent increases, it is more
difficult to converge to the optimal solutions. It can be explained that when all of the agents are
trying to optimize their utility function, and if their benefits contradict with the others, reaching
© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

116

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

optimal solution is not feasible. In addition, this study found that the final converged total travel
times reach the minimum when 75% of the agents are intelligent. The results of competitive
learning environment suggest that the scope of the threshold would lie between 50% and 75%,
above which the system deteriorates, while below which the system improves over the
simulation horizon. This further validates that increasing percentage of intelligent agents does
not necessarily improves the performance of the system.

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

REFERENCES
Bagloee, S. A., Tavana, M., Asadi, M., and Oliver, T. (2016). Autonomous vehicles: challenges,
opportunities, and future implications for transportation policies. Journal of Modern
Transportation, 24(4), 284-303.
Baruah, P., Urgaonkar, R., and Krishnamachari, B. (2004, November). Learning-enforced time
domain routing to mobile sinks in wireless sensor fields. In Local Computer Networks, 2004.
29th Annual IEEE International Conference on (pp. 525-532). IEEE.
Du, L., Chen, S., and Han, L. (2015). Coordinated online in-vehicle navigation guidance based
on routing game theory. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, (2497), 106-116.
Du, L., Han, L., and Chen, S. (2015). Coordinated online in-vehicle routing balancing user
optimality and system optimality through information perturbation. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 79, 121-133.
Fagnant, D. J., and Kockelman, K. (2015). Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles:
opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice, 77, 167-181.
Genders, W., and Razavi, S. N. (2015). Impact of connected vehicle on work zone network
safety through dynamic route guidance. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 30(2),
04015020.
Guizzo, E. (2011). How Google’s self-driving car works. IEEE Spectrum Online, 18(7), 11321141.
Hong, D., Kimmel, S., Boehling, R., Camoriano, N., Cardwell, W., Jannaman, G., and Russel, E.
(2008, August). Development of a semi-autonomous vehicle operable by the visuallyimpaired. In Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems, 2008. MFI 2008.
IEEE International Conference on (pp. 539-544). IEEE.
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., and Moore, A. W. (1996). Reinforcement learning: A survey.
Journal of artificial intelligence research, 4, 237-285.
Littman, M., and Boyan, J. (1993, July). A distributed reinforcement learning scheme for
network routing. In Proceedings of the international workshop on applications of neural
networks to telecommunications (pp. 45-51). Erlbaum Hillsdale, NJ, U.S.
Mostafizi, A., Dong, S., and Wang, H. (2017). Percolation phenomenon in connected vehicle
network through a multi-agent approach: Mobility benefits and market penetration.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 85, 312-333.
Peshkin, L., and Savova, V. (2002). Reinforcement learning for adaptive routing. In Neural
Networks, 2002. IJCNN'02. Proceedings of the 2002 International Joint Conference on (Vol.
2, pp. 1825-1830). IEEE.
Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An introduction (Vol. 1, No. 1).
Cambridge: MIT press.
Watkins, C. J., and Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4), 279-292.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

117

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by Tufts University on 07/18/18. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.

Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo.(ccl. northwestern.edu/netlogo). Center for Connected Learning
and Computer Based Modeling, Northwestern University.

© ASCE

International Conference on Transportation and Development 2018

118

