7009

Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems 44 (2023) 7009–7025
DOI:10.3233/JIFS-222932
IOS Press

Multi-objective route recommendation
method based on Q-learning algorithm
Qingying Yua,b , Zhenxing Xiaoa,b , Feng Yanga,b , Shan Gonga,b , Gege Shia,b
and Chuanming Chena,b,∗
a School
b Anhui

of Computer and Information, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu 241002, Anhui, China
Provincial Key Laboratory of Network and Information Security, Wuhu, Anhui, China

Abstract. With the continuous expansion of city scale and the advancement of transportation technology, route recommendations have become an increasingly common concern in academic and engineering circles. Research on route recommendation
technology can significantly satisfy the travel demands of residents and city operations, thereby promoting the construction of
smart cities and the development of intelligent transportation. However, most current route recommendation methods focus
on generating a route satisfying a single objective attribute and fail to comprehensively consider other types of objective
attributes or user preferences to generate personalized recommendation routes. This study proposes a multi-objective route
recommendation method based on the reinforcement learning algorithm Q-learning, that comprehensively considers multiple
objective attributes, such as travel time, safety risk, and COVID-19 risk, and generates recommended routes that satisfy the
requirements of different scenarios by combining user preferences. Simultaneously, to address the problem that the Q-learning
algorithm has low iteration efficiency and easily falls into the local optimum, this study introduces the dynamic exploration
factor σ and initializes the value function in the road network construction process. The experimental results show that, when
compared to other traditional route recommendation algorithms, the recommended path generated by the proposed algorithm
has a lower path cost, and based on its unique Q-value table search mechanism, the proposed algorithm can generate the
recommended route almost in real time.
Keywords: Route recommendation, multi-objective, user preferences, reinforcement learning, dynamic exploration factor

1. Introduction
Route recommendation research has always been
a hot topic in the fields of computers and transportation, and it is crucial to urban transportation
planning and smart city construction [1–5]. The
traditional approach is to find the shortest geographical route connecting a given origin and destination,
namely, the traveling salesman problem [6–8]. In fact,
user preferences play a major role in the generation
process of recommended routes [9]. In addition to
considering the shortest route as the recommenda∗ Corresponding author. Chuanming Chen, School of Computer
and Information, Anhui Normal University, No. 189 Jiuhua South
Road, Wuhu, Anhui Province 241002, China. Tel.: +86 0553
5910645; E-mail: ccm1981@ahnu.edu.cn.

tion objective, the route recommendation algorithm
can also consider other attributes as the recommendation objective to satisfy the travel requirements of
different user preferences. For example, the route recommended by the route recommendation algorithm
aimed at a short travel time or distance can reduce the
user’s travel time and cost. The route recommendation algorithm aimed at city sightseeing can provide
tourists with scenic tour routes. However, these route
recommendation algorithms typically only consider
a single attribute as the objective and cannot consider multiple attributes comprehensively. Therefore,
multi-objective route recommendation algorithms
have emerged that can comprehensively consider the
multiple preferences of users and calculate the route
to meet the multiple requirements of users.

ISSN 1064-1246/$35.00 © 2023 – IOS Press. All rights reserved.

7010

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

However, existing multi-objective route recommendation algorithms cannot provide routes that
balance multiple objective attributes. For example,
when following the user preferences of fuel consumption with less weight, travel time, and environmental
index with more weight, the existing multi-objective
route recommendation algorithms may suggest a
long detour route, which will significantly increase
the vehicle’s fuel consumption and travel time.
This extreme case was not desired by the user.
Simultaneously, most existing multi-objective route
recommendation algorithms tend to focus on common indicators, such as travel time, travel distance,
and fuel consumption, while ignoring the safety difference between different routes. Traffic accidents
on urban roads not only cause personal injury and
property damage but also cause serious traffic congestion. In particular, during peak hours, delays caused
by traffic jams and accidents on urban roads result
in enormous socioeconomic losses. Traffic accidents
have become one of the leading causes of death
worldwide, with China having one of the highest
numbers of traffic deaths. In some cases, route safety
must be prioritized. For example, tourists pay more
attention to the safety of the route recommended by
the system when traveling in a new city. For school
bus commutes, schools and parents are more concerned about the safety of the route than the length
of the trip. In these cases, high route security is
the primary goal. In addition, the global spread of
COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) has become
the current background, and research on the COVID19 epidemic has become a research hotspot in various
fields. However, few studies have been conducted on
route generation algorithms that can avoid high-risk
areas of COVID-19.
Reinforcement learning is a very popular research
topic in the field of artificial intelligence in recent
years. Reinforcement learning is mainly composed of
agent, environment, state, action and reward. It aims
to simulate the decision-making and learning process
of agents in the constantly changing environment,
with the goal of maximizing the cumulative reward
value of agents. After the agent performs an action,
the environment will transition to a new state, for
which the environment will give the agent a reward
value (positive or negative). The agent then performs
the new action according to a certain strategy based
on the new state and the reward from environmental
feedback. The agent interacts with the environment
repeatedly in this manner until the agent receives the
last state in the environment.

The process of an agent interacting with the environment and expecting the maximum reward value
to reach the final state is similar to the process of
a car seeking the best route to the end. The reward
feedback mechanism of reinforcement learning can
also be used as an evaluation index for the quality of multi-objective optimization results in the
route recommendation process. Therefore, based on
reinforcement learning theory, this study proposes
a multi-objective route recommendation algorithm
[6] called MORRBQ (Multi-objective Route Recommendation Method Based on Q-learning). Route
security and COVID-19 risk were added as the consideration factors of the system; that is, the three
objective attributes of short travel time, low safety
risk, and low COVID-19 risk were considered simultaneously, and the route recommendation was made
based on user preferences. Simultaneously, the MORRBQ algorithm introduces a dynamic exploration
factor σ and initializes the value function in the road
network construction process, which is used to solve
the defects of the Q-learning algorithm, such as low
iteration efficiency and ease of falling into the local
optimum.
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
• In addition to travel time, safety risk and
COVID-19 risk are added as the consideration
objectives for the proposed route recommendation algorithm, which is used to facilitate users
to assign weights to different objective attributes
to obtain personalized recommendation routes.
A reward table training algorithm that considers
different user preferences is proposed.
• A Q-value table initialization algorithm is proposed, which shortens the agents’ iteration time
and makes the agents’ choice of road nodes and
actions clearer.
• A multi-objective route recommendation algorithm based on a dynamic exploration factors is
proposed to avoid falling into the local optimum.
• A series of experiments are conducted that verify
the effectiveness and practicality of the proposed
algorithms, and the experimental results show
the work performed in this study to be more
effective than existing route recommendation
methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 presents
the definitions used in this paper. Section 4 introduces the algorithm framework and the content of
the multi-objective route recommendation algorithm.

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

Section 5 presents the experimental results and analyses. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and
outlines future work.

2. Related work
Extensive research has been conducted on route
recommendations resulting in many achievements.
Existing route recommendation methods can be
divided into two categories: single-objective and
multi-objective route recommendations.
2.1. Single-objective route recommendation
Research on single-objective route recommendations has a long history. The commonly used Dijkstra
algorithm is used to search for the shortest route,
which corresponds to optimizing a single objective
and typically only considers one-dimensional costs
such as distance, time, and speed [7]. Research by
some scholars [5, 6] avoids unnecessary braking of
vehicles by using the optimal speed curve to design
the control system to improve fuel efficiency on
the route from origin to destination and achieve the
goal of saving fuel resources. However, the above
scholar’s research has a problem of low route recommendation accuracy. To address this problem,
Cheng et al. [10] proposed a travel route recommendation algorithm based on interest theme and
distance matching. The algorithm first obtains the
user’s real historical travel footprints through analysis
and then extracts the user’s interest theme preference
and distance matching based on the user’s stay time
in each scenic spot. Finally, an optimal trip calculation method is designed based on the trip time limit,
start point, and end point. Compared to the traditional algorithm, the proposed algorithm has a higher
accuracy and recall rate. Wang et al. [11] combined
A* algorithm and recursive neural network based
on attention mechanism, proposed a travel cost prediction algorithm for estimating candidate locations
to destination locations, to recommend travel routes
with lower travel costs for users. Zhou et al. [12]
proposed a hybrid route prediction and recommendation method to solve route recommendations under a
mixed traffic mode. Feng et al. [13] proposed a recommendation algorithm based on DBSCAN using
passenger hotspots for profitable taxi cruising route
recommendation. Jia et al. [14] proposed an algorithm that combined the weighted shortest route and
deep learning to recommend context-aware routes for

7011

users. Studies by the above scholars did not consider
user preferences. Therefore, Silva et al. [15] proposed a route recommendation method based on user
behavior, which mined user preferences through the
historical data of user trips and recommended appropriate routes to users. Ji et al. [16] studied the dynamic
taxi route recommendation problem as a sequential
decision problem and designed an adaptive deep reinforcement learning method that fused the extracted
spatio-temporal features through a deep policy network to carry out effective route recommendation.
However, these studies did not consider the traffic
characteristics of the routes. The literatures [17, 18]
deal with single-objective route selection by analyzing different traffic characteristics, with the goal of
reducing travel time, fuel consumption, and exposure to air pollutants. Kang et al. [19] considered
the road slope of a specific intersection and used
a dynamic programming method to determine the
optimal speed curve to reduce the fuel consumption.
In the above studies, some methods did not consider user preferences, whereas others that considered
user preferences did not combine different preferences (such as travel time and fuel consumption)
to achieve multi-objective route recommendations.
Similarly, some of these scholars’ studies did not
consider user preferences, and some methods that
considered user preferences still did not combine different preferences.
2.2. Multi-objective route recommendation
Sarker et al. [20] proposed a multi-objective routerecommendation algorithm that considered three
different attributes: fuel consumption, travel time,
and air quality. Based on the reinforcement learning algorithm and user preferences, the algorithm
can generate a personalized recommended route in
time. Guo et al. [21] proposed a method to predict the
travel time and fuel consumption of different roads
using GPS trajectories, and recommended a route
for users that comprehensively considered time and
fuel efficiency. Zheng et al. [22] proposed a variable neighborhood search algorithm and a hybrid
particle swarm optimization genetic optimization
algorithm to recommend top-K routes. Huang et
al. [23] proposed a flexible multi-task deep travel
route planning framework, which constructed heterogeneous networks through the relationship between
POI and users and integrated auxiliary information
for more effective planning. Based on the particle swarm optimization algorithm, Malik et al. [24]

7012

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

designed a route optimization objective function
considering five parameters: distance, road congestion, weather conditions, route popularity, and user
preference, which were used to predict the optimal
route to the next tourist attraction. Rani et al. [25]
combined the K-means clustering method with the
traveling salesman problem-solving method to generate travel itineraries by considering both distance
and travel time to recommend the optimal route. The
above multi-objective route recommendation methods do not consider safety risks and other factors,
and because of the high time complexity of the optimization solution calculation, they cannot provide
near-real-time optimal routes.
In summary, research in the field of route
recommendation mainly focuses on route recommendation methods based on a single objective
and route recommendation methods based on multiple objectives. Existing single-objective route
recommendation methods cannot consider the multipreference requirements of users, whereas most
multi-objective route recommendation methods do
not consider some novel objective attributes, such as
safety risk attributes and COVID-19 risk attributes.
Owing to the constant variation of the novel coronavirus and continuous spread of epidemic viruses,
it has become an urgent concern for users whether
the generated recommended routes can avoid highrisk areas. Based on the research status of the above,
this study proposes a multi-objective route recommendation method based on reinforcement learning,
which considers the travel time and safety risk, and
the COVID-19 risk is one of the objective attributes.
Simultaneously, it satisfies the demand of user preferences and meets the recommended route under the
condition of different scenarios to realize personalized recommendation.
3. Problem description
This section provides background information and
problem description.
3.1. Road network model
(1) Road Network
In this study, a road network is abstracted as
a network model composed of finite nodes and
edges, which is represented by G(V, E) where V is
the set composed of the starting and ending points
of each road section and is represented by V =
{v1 , v2 , · · · , vn } and E is the set of all edges (road

Fig. 1. Cost of road segment.

sections connecting two 
nodes) and is represented
by E = ei,j |1 ≤ i, j ≤ n , where ei,j represents the
edge connecting nodes vi and vj . Each road section (edge) has a 3-dimensional vector costi,j =
[ti,j , si,j , ci,j ], which represents the cost value of the
road section. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. The three
components of this vector ti,j , Si,j , and Ci,j represent
the cost from node vi to vj in terms of the travel time,
safety risk, and COVID-19 risk, respectively.
(2) Route
The set of a series of edges connecting the origin
and destination is called a route in the road network,
and can be expressed as follows:


τ = est,1 , e1,2 , e2,3 , · · · , en,end
(1)
where est,1 is the edge connecting the source node vst
and v1 in route τ, and en,end is the edge connecting
vn and destination node vend in route τ.
(3) Total Route Cost
The total route cost refers to the sum of the travel
time, safety risk, and COVID-19 risk costs for each
section of the route. The higher the value, the higher
is the cost of the corresponding attribute of the path.
The total path cost is calculated as follows:

COSTτ =
Wp · costi,j
(2)
ei,j ∈τ

where COSTτ is the route τ’s sum of costs of each
section, and W p = [wt , ws , wc ] is a 3-dimensional
weight vector, where wt , ws , and wc are the preference weights of users on the travel time, safety risk,
and COVID-19 risk, respectively.
3.2. Multi-objective model
(1) Travel time
The minimization of travel time is a common
optimization goal in various route recommendation
algorithms. In this study, the travel time consumption
value of the recommended route is calculated based
on the length of each road section in the New York
Road network data and the average traffic speed of
the city road. The traffic time consumption value of
each road section in the road network is stored in the
traffic time matrix T , where ti,j (ti,j ∈ T ) denotes the
traffic time consumption value on road section ei,j .

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

Fig. 2. Traffic accidents distribution in New York.

(2) Safety Risk Index
The occurrence of urban road traffic accidents
is inevitable and is affected by certain factors, and
the frequency of accidents varies by section. In this
model, the probability of traffic accidents, namely,
the safety risk index, is approximated by calculating
the frequency of traffic accidents for each road section in the historical data. The safety risk index of
each road section in the road network is stored in the
safety risk matrix S, where si,j (si,j ∈ S) is expressed
as the safety risk index of the road section ei,j . As
shown in Fig. 2, the frequency of traffic accidents in
Brooklyn, New York is relatively high, with an annual
accident rate of 18,000 on average. Staten Island has
a low accident rate, with fewer than 4,000 accidents
annually.
(3) COVID-19 Risk Index
The COVID-19 epidemic has spread and covered
the entire world, which has become the background of
the current era and an issue that must be paid attention
to in social production activities that concern peoples’
lives and safety. Therefore, it is of great research value
and social significance to recommend routes to avoid
COVID-19 risk areas. Based on public historical data,
this study calculated the COVID-19 risk index of each
road section based on the time attribute and longitude
and latitude coordinates of the COVID-19 risk areas.
The COVID-19 risk index of each road section in the
road network is stored in the COVID-19 risk matrix
C, where ci,j (ci,j ∈ C) represents the COVID-19 risk
index on the road section ei,j .
3.3. Description of environment and space
(1) Environment
In this study, the environment, also known as
the road network environment, is defined as the

7013

updated road network. Each edge ei,j has three different attribute values, which are stored in the form
of [wt ti,j , ws si,j , wc ci,j ], representing the predicted
value of the traffic time, safety risk index, and
COVID-19 risk index under the given user preference
W p = [wt , ws , wc ].
(2) Agent
Under the given road network environment, source
node and destination node, the route recommendation
algorithm as an agent selects the most appropriate
action (i.e., selects an appropriate road section) based
on the predicted attributes of each road section and
generates an optimal route from the source node to
destination node after a series of calculations and
selections.
(3) State Space
A state is a summary of the current environment
denoted by s. The state space is the set of all possible states denoted by S, where s ∈ S. In this study,
the state space is a set of road network environments
composed of finite edges and nodes, and each edge
contains all the objective attribute values (travel time,
safety risk index, and COVID-19 risk index).
(4) Action Space
An action is the choice made by the agent, denoted
by a. The action space is the set of all actions denoted
by A, where a ∈ A. The action space defines the set
of actions (agent selects an edge) that can be selected
by the agent in the current state, that is, given node
vi , source node vst , destination node vend , and the
attribute values of different edges.

3.4. Optimal route
(1) Optimal route under a single objective.
The optimal route under a single objective consists of a limited set of road segments (edges) that
connect the source and destination node set by the
user, which satisfies the optimal result under a certain objective (e.g., the shortest route between two
points is to achieve the goal of minimizing the total
distance cost).
(2) Optimal route under multi-objective optimization
Given the road network G = (V, E), each edge has
three objective attribute values: road length, safety
risk index, and COVID-19 risk index, an optimal
route connecting the source node and destination
node set by the user is generated, and the total cost
of the three objective attributes on this route is minimized.

7014

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

4. Multi-objective route recommendation
algorithm based on q-learning
Based on the Q-learning algorithm, this study
proposes a multi-objective route recommendation
algorithm based on Q-learning (MORRBQ) to find
the optimal route from the source node to the destination node satisfying the multi-objective constraints.
As a classical algorithm in the field of reinforcement
learning, compared with other traditional methods,
the Q-learning algorithm can quickly find the optimal
route and save a significant amount of computation
time during route selection.
The MORRBQ algorithm calculates the reward
value of each road section based on the three objective attributes (travel time, safety risk index, and
COVID-19 risk index) and forms a reward matrix.
This algorithm uses a route recommendation algorithm as the agent. In the execution process of the
algorithm, first, the state and action are constructed
into a Q-value table based on the reward matrix and
Behrman equation. The Q-value is Q (st , at ), which
refers to the expected value of the reward that can
be obtained by taking action at under state st at a
certain time t. Subsequently, the Dijkstra algorithm
is used to pregenerate the shortest route connecting the source node and destination node, and the
nodes passing through the route are used to initialize the Q-value table. Then, the dynamic exploration
factor σ and value function are used to update the Qvalue table. The environment provides feedback on
the corresponding expected reward value Q (st , at ),
according to the action taken by the agent. The agent
is trained several times to obtain the updated Q-value
table. Finally, the agent selects the optimal route from
the source node to the destination node by selecting
an action that maximizes the Q-value after receiving
the state each time according to the Q-value table.
The complete framework of the algorithm is shown
in Fig. 3.

4.1. Data Preprocessing
The algorithm used in this study used three datasets
from different sources. First, it must delete abnormal
records in the dataset and fill in the missing items. To
eliminate the influence of dimensional and numerical size scale differences between datasets, the data
should be normalized. yk represents the value of the
objective attribute k. The formula for data normaliza-

tion is shown in Equation (3).
yk
yk, = max
yk

(3)

where yk, denotes the normalized value of yk , and ykmax
denotes the maximum value of objective attribute k.
4.2. Multi-objective attribute prediction
4.2.1. Travel time prediction
Travel time is one of the most commonly used optimization objectives for route recommendation. In this
study, the ratio of the length of each road section to
the average speed of vehicles was used as the predicted value of the travel time of this road section,
and the calculation formula is expressed in Equation
(4).
ti,j =

leni,j
vavg

(4)

where leni,j denotes the length of the road segment
(edge) ei,j , vavg denotes the average speed of the
urban road, and ti,j denotes the predicted traffic time
of the road segment (edge) ei,j .
4.2.2. Safety risk prediction
The safety risk index refers to the probability of
traffic accidents occurring on a road section. In route
recommendations, users are more inclined to choose
road sections with fewer traffic accidents occurred
in the past. In existing studies on safety route recommendation, most researchers adopt a calculation
method based on the occurrence density of traffic
accidents, that is, within a certain radius, the ratio
between the number of accidents and area or the
average distance between the midpoint of a road
section and the location of traffic accidents in the
area. The density-based safety risk index calculation
method increases the computational cost and time
consumption, which is not conducive to the timely
feedback of route recommendation results. In the
data pre-processing stage, the route recommendation
algorithm proposed in this study uses a random forest
to classify the safety risk index of each road section.
According to the historical data on traffic accidents,
the safety evaluation of road sections is divided into
four categories. Values from 1 to 4 represent the safety
risks from low to high. The safety risk index of road
segment (edge) ei,j is represented by si,j , and the
safety risk index of road segment can be directly
used as a component of the reward value of MORRBQ algorithm. After assigning the safety risk index

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

7015

Fig. 3. Multi-objective route recommendation algorithm framework.

to each road section in the data pre-processing stage,
the computation time and memory consumption of
the system can be significantly reduced.
4.2.3. COVID-19 risk prediction
A novel function of the proposed multiobjective
route recommendation method is to avoid COVID-19
risk areas when creating routes. Based on the current
location of the road (the midpoint coordinates of the
road) and the longitude and latitude coordinates of
the location of COVID-19 cases, the COVID-19 risk
index ci,j was calculated and added to the reward
value. The calculation method for ci,j is to draw a circle with the midpoint of the road section as the center
and the length of the road section as the radius. The
average distance between the midpoint of the road
section and each COVID-19 case within the circle
was calculated and divided by the length of the road
section. All roads were assigned a COVID-19 risk
index value, calculated as follows:


n
k=1 distance xi,j , gk
ci,j =
(5)
n
leni,j

where n (n =
/ 0) denotes the number of COVID-19
cases within the radius of each node; xi,j denotes the
midpoint position of road segment ei,j , and g denotes
the list of COVID-19 cases within the radius of each
node. When the difference between the time of diagnosis of COVID-19 case gk and the current time
 is less
than the threshold θ, the function distance xi,j , gk
is used to calculate the distance between xi,j and the
location of gk , leni,j is the length of road ei,j . If there
are no COVID-19 cases within the setting range of the
current road node (i.e., n = 0), ci,j will take a min-

imum value μ. A detailed description of COVID-19
risk prediction is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: COVID-19 risk prediction
Input: G(V, E), θ, g, μ
Output: C
1. Initialize C ← Ø;
2. for each ei,j ∈ E do
3.
if g = ∅ then
4.
ci,j ← μ;
5.
else if g =
/ ∅ then
6.
for each gk ∈ g do
7.
ti ← the interval between the time
when case gk occurred and
the current time;
8.
if ti < θ then
9.
ci,j ← the COVID risk of ei,j
calculated by Equation (5);
10.
end if
11.
end for
12. end if
13.end for
14.return C;

4.3. Reward calculation
The reward value is the immediate reward for
choosing a particular action (e.g., edge ei,j ) from
a finite set of actions. To determine the immediate
reward of the selected edge, the given user preference and all predicted values of the road segment
(travel time, safety, and COVID-19 risk) are combined, and the direct distance between the current
node vi and destination node vend (i.e., Euclidean distance) is considered to ensure that the vehicle drives
to the destination as quickly as possible. Therefore,
the agent creates a reward table based on the road

7016

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

network, destination node vend , and given user preferences, namely W p = [wt , ws , wc ].
The reward table is in the form of an adjacency
matrix, R|V |×|V | ,, where |V | represents the total number of nodes in the road network. ri,j (1 ≤ i, j ≤ |V |)
on behalf of the reward from the current state in table
R st (i.e., node vi ), the next state st+1 (i.e., node
vj ) chooses an action (i.e., ei,j ) direct incentive. If
/ E,
nodes vi and vj are not connected, that is, eij ∈
the reward is –∞, which indicates that there is no
edge. The method for calculating immediate reward
ri,j is presented in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2: Reward table training
Input: G(V, E), Wp „ T, S, C
Output: R
1. Initialize R;
2. for i ← 1 to |V | do
3. for j ← 1 to |V | do
4.
if vj = vend then
5.
ri,j ← +∞;
6.
if ei,j ∈ E then


7.
ri,j ← − wt ti,j + ws si,j + wc ci,j ;
8.
else
9.
ri,j ← −∞;
10.
end if
11. end for
12. end for
13. return R;

where vend denotes the destination node. Assume
that the user’s preference is W p = [0.30, 0.30, 0.40].
According to Algorithm 2, the immediate reward was
calculated for the road network shown in Fig. 4, and
the reward table is listed in Table 1.
where row represents state vi , in which the agent is
in, and column represents the actions that the agent
can take in the state located at node vi . For example,
in the state of node v2 , the reward value of the agent
taking action to reach node v3 was –0.191.
4.4. Dynamic exploration factor
Using appropriate strategies to select the optimal
action is a key point in the field of force-change
learning. The Q-learning algorithm uses ε-greedy
strategies to plan the search and update the environment. In general, ε is a fixed hyperparameter, which
may cause the agent to not sufficiently explore the
environment in the early stage of iterative computation, resulting in a failure to generate the optimal route
and failure to converge in the later stage. To solve this
problem, a dynamic exploration factor σ was pro-

posed in this study. The size of σ is dynamically
adjusted based on the number of iterations during
the execution of the algorithm. The specific function
expression of σ is given by Equation (6).

x2
− 2N
1
(6)
σ = K√ e
2π
where x denotes the number of current iterations,
N denotes the maximum number of iterations in
a training round, and K denotes a hyperparameter.
The introduction of the dynamic exploration factor σ
can effectively solve the problem in which the value
function easily falls into the local optimum after initialization and can accelerate the convergence speed
of the algorithm.
4.5. Q-value table initialization
The process of agent exploration is constantly
searching for the optimal strategy, and its operational efficiency will improve with a reduction in
the exploration process. Combined with the Dijkstra
algorithm, the value function Q(s, a) of Q-learning
is initialized using the shortest route result obtained
by the algorithm. The initialization of the Q-value
table can not only effectively shorten the iteration
time of the algorithm but also make the agents’ selection of road nodes and actions clearer. The specific
process of the Q-value table initialization is presented
in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Q-value table initialization
Input: G(V, E), vst , vend
Output: Q-value table
1. Call the Dijkstra algorithm to generate the
shortest route h from vst to vend ;
2. Record the action a taken by the previous state s
to transition to the next state ss’ ’ in the route;
3. for each part in h do
4. if n < σ then
5.
Q(s, a) = = 0;
6. else
7.
Q(s, a)= = -–1;
8. end for
9. return Q-value table;

4.6. Q-value table update and model training
As shown in Fig. 5, the agent builds a matrix Qvalue table of the same order as the reward table,
which stores the Q-value corresponding to each state
in the environment, and every action taken after

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

7017

Fig. 4. Road network topology.
Table 1
Reward table instance

hhh

hhh

Current state

Next state

hhh

hh
h

v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v6

v1

v2

v3

v4

v5

v6

–∞
–∞
–∞
–∞
–∞
–∞

–0.161
–∞
–0.191
–∞
–∞
–∞

–0.100
–0.191
–∞
–∞
–∞
–∞

–∞
–0.100
–0.144
–∞
–∞
–∞

–∞
–∞
–0.109
–∞
–∞
–∞

–∞
–∞
–∞
+∞
+∞
–∞

Fig. 5. Q-value table update and model training.

receiving the state. From the Q-value table, the agent
can take the action corresponding to the largest Qvalue after receiving any state. To achieve this goal,
the agent used the Behrman equation (i.e., the value
function) to update the Q-value table, as shown in
Equation (7).
Q (st , at ) = Q (st , at ) + α
rt + γmaxat+1 Q (st+1 , at+1 ) − Q (st , at )

(7)

where ␣ is a learning rate parameter used to accelerate
the convergence of the Q-value in the presence of
noise and ␥ is a discount factor that guarantees the
convergence of update rewards for all future edges of
the current node.
The Q-value table must be updated several times
(the number of iterations is denoted by D). In each
iteration, any node was randomly selected as the initial state. Then, based on the value of the dynamic
exploration factor σ and the size of the random number generated at each step, the agent selects the action
at and executes it in the current state st , obtains
the new state st+1 and the current reward rt+1 , and

updates the value of Q (st , at ) in the table simultaneously. Iterate until the destination node is reached.
The entire algorithm is a process of constantly updating the Q-value table, and then determining which
action to take in a certain state is the best choice
according to the updated value. A detailed description
of the Q-value table construction and multiobjective
route recommendation is presented in Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 4: Multi-objective route recommendation
Input:α, γ, D, R, A
Output: Q-value table
1. Initialize Q(s, a) randomly;
2. Q (vend , ) ← 0;
3. for each d in D do
4. Initialize state st ; //st : original state in each episode
5. for each step in d do
6.
do
7.
σ ← the search factor calculated by Equation (6);
8.
n ← uniform random number between 0 and 1;
9.
if n < σ then
10.
at+1 ← random action from A;
11.
else
12.
at+1 ← maxQ (st , ·);
13.
take action at+1 , observe reward rt+1 and choose next
state st+1 ;
14.
Q(st , at ) ← the Q-value calculated by Equation (7);
15.
st ← st+1 ;
16.
while st is not teminal-state;
17.
end for
18.end for
19.return Q-value table;

7018

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

4.7. Multi-objective optimal route selection
After training, the system uses the updated Q-value
table to select the optimal route from the source node.
Specifically, it is based on the current node to find different adjacent nodes, from the Q-value of the update
table to retrieve the Q-value, on the edge of the adjacent to the current node, based on certain rules from
all possible edges, choosing to have the largest Qvalue to reach the next node, repeating the steps until
it reaches the destination node, and generating the
multi-objective optimal route.
The main operation of the multi-objective optimal
route selection is to find the Q-value table and select
the action with the largest Q-value in the retrieval
process. This search operation significantly reduces
the complexity of the multi-objective optimization
problem and reduces the solution time to near real
time.

4.8. Algorithm complexity analysis
4.8.1. Time complexity analysis
The time complexity of Algorithm 1 primarily
depends on two factors: (1) the number of sections
(edges) in the road network and (2) the size of the
COVID-19 case list within the radius of each road
section. Therefore, the time complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(k ∗ m2 ), where k denotes the number
of COVID-19 cases within the radius of each section
and m denotes the number of sections (edges) in the
road network. Because k
m, the time complexity
of Algorithm 1 is O(m2 ).
The time complexity of Algorithm 2 primarily
depends on the computation cost of the reward value
between nodes; therefore, the time complexity of
Algorithm 2 is O(n2 ), where n denotes the number of
nodes in the road network.
The time complexity of Algorithm 3 primarily
depends on the search of the shortest route; therefore,
the time complexity of Algorithm 3 is O(n2 ), where
n denotes the number of nodes in the road network.
The time complexity of Algorithm 4 primarily
depends on two factors: (1) the number of training sessions of the Q-value table and (2) the size of
the Q-value table. Therefore, the time complexity of
Algorithm 3 is O(c ∗ n2 ), where c denotes the number of training sessions in the Q-value table, c is a
constant, and n denotes the number of nodes in the
road network. Because c
n, the time complexity
of Algorithm 3 is O(n2 ).

4.8.2. Space complexity analysis
The space complexity of Algorithm 1 primarily
depends on the storage cost of two parts of the data:
(1) the number of road segments (edges) in the road
network and (2) the number of COVID-19 cases
within the radius of each road section. Therefore, the
space complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(k ∗ m2 ), where
k denotes the number of COVID-19 cases within the
radius of each road section and m denotes the number of edges in the road network. Because k
m, the
space complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(m2 ).
The space complexity of Algorithm 2 primarily
depends on the matrix of the space overhead reward,
and the space complexity of Algorithm 4 primarily
depends on the Q-value table space overhead reward.
The size of the matrix and Q-value table are decided
by the road network node number. Therefore, the
space complexity of Algorithms 2 and 4 is O(n2 ),
where n denotes the number of nodes in the road
network.
The space complexity of Algorithm 3 primarily
depends on the storage overhead of the road network
G(V, E); therefore, the space complexity of Algorithm
3 is O(n2 ), where n denotes the number of nodes in
the road network.

5. Experiment
5.1. Datasets
Real-world geotagged datasets were used in this
experiment, including New York road network data,
New York traffic accident data, and New York
COVID-19 data.
(1) Road Network data
This dataset was derived from the New York City
road network data published by OpenStreetMap, as
shown in Fig. 6. It consists of more than one million data records, including the longitude and latitude
coordinates of the starting and ending points of the
road segments, the length of the road segments,
and other characteristics, and the detailed description is shown in Table 2. For example, the data
record (2, 886.4, 40.082561, –74.548430, 40.081576,
–74.554403) indicates that the total length of the
road segment numbered 2 is 886.4 m, and the
longitude and latitude coordinates of the starting
and ending points are (–74.548430, 40.082561) and
(–74.554403, 40.081576).
1

https://www.openstreetmap.org

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

7019

Table 2
Information of Road network in New York
Id
1
2
3
...
1215612

Len

S Lat

S Lng

E Lat

926.7
886.4
344.2
...
52.4

40.079066
40.082561
40.080466
...
41.259713

–74.553253
–74.548430
–74.549885
...
–73.784339

40.079134
40.081576
40.081977
...
41.259824

5.2. Experiment algorithm

Fig. 6. Road network in New York.

In this study, 20 source-destination node pairs were
randomly selected from the New York City road network for the multi-objective route recommendation
experiment, and the Euclidean distance between the
selected source-destination node pairs should be at
least 5 km.
(2) Traffic Accident Data
The dataset is derived from the publicly released
traffic accident data from the New York City Police
Department and records the traffic accident data of
New York City from 2015 to 2017, including a total
of 477732 records, the time of the accident, the accident location latitude and longitude coordinates, the
number of casualties, and severe level characteristics,
including the severity of the traffic accident, ranging
from 1 to 4. A higher value indicates a higher accident
severity. The composition and recording features of
this dataset are presented in Table 3.
(3) COVID-19 Data
The dataset was from 578 COVID-19 cases published by the New York City government from
October 21 to December 27, 2020, and includes
features such as the time of COVID-19 risk areas, latitude and longitude coordinates, number of medical
visits, and number of deaths. The feature compositions and partial records of this dataset are presented
in Table 4.
2
3

https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/traffic-data
https://www.github.com/nychealth/coronavirus-data

To verify the superiority of the MORRBQ algorithm in the multi-objective route recommendation
problem, this study conducted relative comparative
experiments between the proposed algorithm and
three other traditional route recommendation algorithms. The four algorithms are described as follows:
(1) MORRBQ Algorithm
The MORRBQ algorithm is a route recommendation algorithm proposed in this study. It is
implemented based on the reinforcement learning
algorithm Q-learning, which introduces the initialization operation of the Q-value table and dynamic
search factor σ. In the training phase of the model,
10000 iterations were performed to generate the
Q-value table for the experimental phase. In each iteration, a source-destination pair is randomly selected
from the set of nodes and edges, and a Q-learning
algorithm is used to update the Q-value table accordingly. To achieve the optimal experimental effect,
after comparing the experimental results obtained
under different parameter settings, ␥ = 0.7 and ␣ = 0.6
were set in this study.
(2) MORR Algorithm
The MORR algorithm [20] is also a multi-objective
route recommendation algorithm based on the Qlearning algorithm, and is the main comparison
algorithm of the MORRBQ algorithm proposed in
this study. However, the MORR algorithm does not
change the core of the Q-learning algorithm, and it
also considers common objective attributes (travel
time, fuel consumption, and air quality).
(3) PreGo Algorithm.
The PreGo algorithm [24] is a dynamic routing
algorithm that suggests the best route by retrieving
real-time traffic congestion conditions while minimizing the values of two objective attributes (travel
time and fuel consumption) with the same priority.
The PreGo algorithm uses the dynamic A* algorithm
as an optimization scheme to solve the route problem of binocular objects with the same priority. In
the experimental process, the PreGo algorithm was

7020

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm
Table 3
Information of traffic accidents in New York

Id
1
2
3
...
477732

Date

Time

Location

Person Injured

Person Killed

Severity

01/01/2015
01/01/2015
01/01/2015
...
02/28/2017

0:20:00
0:21:00
8:02:00
...
9:57:00

(40.751847,–73.787862)
(40.689444,–73.955121)
(40.839246,–73.870094)
...
(40.814037,–73.948364)

1
1
4
...
1

0
0
1
...
0

1
1
3
...
1

Table 4
Information of COVID-19 in New York
Id
1
2
3
...
578

Date

Latitude

Longitude

Hospitalization

Death

10/21/2020
10/21/2020
10/21/2020

40.750693
40.731825
40.599333
...
40.577599

–73.997137
–73.989164
–74.166462
...
–73.844553

2
6
19
...
4

0
0
7
...
0

12/27/2020

implemented based on the steps of the multipreference shortest-route algorithm in the literature [14].
(4) MORP Algorithm
The MORP algorithm [26] uses a multi-objective
optimization scheme to determine the optimal route
from the source node to destination node. It considers
travel time, fuel consumption, and air quality equally
when finding the best route. However, because of
the multidimensional hypergrid search for the optimal solution, the MORP algorithm takes longer time
(depending on the map size) to provide the optimal
solution.
5.3. Experiment Settings
The experimental environment is AMD Ryzen
5 processor, CPU 3.00 GHz, operating platform is
Windows 10, this study uses Python programming
language to achieve the relevant algorithms in the
experiment.
5.3.1. User preference settings
To reflect the daily requirements of users, three
different settings of user preference weights were
considered in the experiment, as follows:
Scenario 1: W p = [0.33, 0.33, 0.33]. In this scenario
setting, the three attributes of travel time, safety risk,
and COVID-19 risk were assigned the same weight.
Scenario 2: W p = [0.40, 0.40, 0.20]. In this scenario setting, users were more concerned about traffic
time and safety risk attributes, and the above two
attributes were assigned the same weight, whereas
the COVID-19 risk attribute was assigned a lower
weight.

Scenario 3: W p = [0.00, 0.50, 0.50]. In this scenario, users only care about safety and COVID-19
risks and do not require the shortest travel time. This
parameter can be used to simulate extreme real-life
scenarios.
5.3.2. Evaluation indicators
To quantitatively evaluate the performance of the
algorithm, this study uses the running time, convergence time, convergence episodes, reward value
variation trend, exploration steps, and route cost as
the evaluation indices of the algorithm performance.
(1) Running time
To evaluate the running time of the algorithm, the
average of the total running time of the algorithm on
multiple routes was calculated, as shown in Equation
(8).
N
timei
Timeavg = i=1
(8)
N
where timei denotes the running time used by the
algorithm to generate the ith route, N denotes the
total number of routes generated by the algorithm,
and Timeavg denotes the average running time of the
algorithm for generating N routes.
(2) Convergence time and episodes.
To measure the convergence speed of the
algorithm, the convergence time and number of convergence episodes are used as evaluation indices, and
the convergence time can reflect the execution speed
of the route recommendation algorithm. The number of convergent episodes refers to the number of
episodes iterated by the agent when the algorithm
reached the convergence state. The smaller the number of episodes, the higher the learning efficiency of
the agent.

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

(3) Change trend of the reward of the algorithm
In the process of algorithm execution, with the
advancement of iteration, the size and variation trend
of the reward value can effectively reflect the excellent degree of the algorithm.
(4) Exploration
The number of exploration steps is the number of
actions that the agent must perform to reach the destination node in each round. At the same time interval,
the fewer the number of exploration steps of the algorithm, the more training episodes the agent can carry
out, and the more environmental information it can
obtain.
(5) Route Cost
Route cost refers to the sum of the travel time,
safety risk, and COVID-19 risk costs of the route on
each road section. The calculation method is shown
in Equation (9).

⎧
COSTτt =
wt ti,j
⎪
⎪
ei,j ∈τ
⎪
⎪
⎪

⎨
COSTτs =
ws si,j
ei,j ∈τ
⎪
⎪

⎪
c
⎪
⎪
⎩ COSTτ = e ∈τ wc ci,j

(9)

i,j

where COSTτt denotes the total route cost of route
τ for the objective attribute of travel time, COSTτs
denotes the total route cost of route τ for the objective attribute of safety risk, and COSTτc denotes the
total route cost of route τ for the objective attribute
of COVID-19 risk.
5.4. Experimental result
5.4.1. Time performance
Table 5 shows the time performance of the four
algorithms, which were repeated several times, and
the average value was taken as the experimental output data. The time performance of the algorithm was
evaluated using the running time of the algorithm,
time required to achieve convergence, and number of
episodes required to achieve convergence.

7021

As can be observed from the results in the table,
compared with the other three route recommendation algorithms, the time required for the MORRBQ
algorithm to achieve convergence and the number of
episodes required to achieve convergence are significantly less because the initialization operation of the
Q-value table in the proposed method significantly
saves computing time and improves the convergence
speed of the algorithm. However, the PreGo and
MORP algorithms require a significant amount of
time to obtain an optimal solution.
5.4.2. Change trend of algorithm’s reward
The reward value realizes the connection between
the goal and algorithm by making the task goal concrete and nmerical. In a specific application, with the
advancement of exploration steps, the size and variation trend of the reward value can effectively reflect
the degree of excellence of the algorithm.
As shown in Fig. 7, the agent obtains a higher
reward value at the initial stage of exploration because
the MORRBQ algorithm adopts Dijkstra’s algorithm
to initialize the Q-value table function. Compared
with the other three algorithms, the reward value
of the MORRBQ algorithm increased significantly
and converged to zero faster. Moreover, the small
fluctuation in the reward value growth curve of the
MORRBQ algorithm also indicates that it is more
directional and effectively speeds up the exploration
process of the agent.
5.4.3. Algorithm exploration steps
The cost of the algorithm in the optimization process can be expressed as the number of steps required
for convergence. The peak and falling speeds of the
exploration steps reflect the optimization ability and
stability of the algorithm.
As shown in Fig. 8, because the Dijkstra algorithm
is used to initialize the value function during road network construction, the peak value of the exploration
steps of the MORRBQ algorithm is considerably
smaller than that of the other three algorithms, and the
number of episodes required to reach the convergence

Table 5
Time performance comparison of the 4 algorithms
Algorithm

Running
time/min

Convergence
Time/min

Convergence
Episodes

MORRBQ
MORR
PreGo
MORP

6.86
5.65
354.68
351.18

3.29
3.83
226.73
210.26

6000
6200
9100
>10000

7022

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

Fig. 9. Route cost of the 4 algorithms on different target attributes
in Scenario 1.
Fig. 7. The change trend of reward value of the 4 algorithms.

Fig. 10. Route cost of the 4 algorithms on different target attributes
in Scenario 2.

Fig. 8. Change trend of exploration steps of the 4 algorithms.

state is also considerably smaller than that of the other
algorithms. Compared with the MORR algorithm,
the MORRBQ algorithm has higher stability after
reaching the convergence state. Overall, the dynamic
exploration factor σ enhances the exploration ability
of the MORRBQ algorithm at the initial stage of iteration and assists the algorithm to improve the final
convergence degree when more environmental feedback information is obtained. Compared with other
algorithms, the MORRBQ algorithm shows stronger
stability performance and exploration ability.
5.4.4. Result of route cost comparison
Figures 12, 13, and 14 show the route cost comparison results of the recommended route generated
by the MORRBQ, PreGo, and MORP algorithms,
respectively, for different objective attributes under
three user preference setting scenarios.
As can be observed from Fig. 9, the route generated by the PreGo algorithm has higher travel time,

safety risk, and COVID-19 risk than other methods because the PreGo algorithm discards some of
the best routes when using the dynamic A* algorithm to find a solution. The MORP algorithm uses
an adaptive ␧-constrained optimization solution and
considers different attributes in isolation.
As shown in Fig. 10, in Scenario 2, the experimental results of the MORRBQ and MORR algorithms
were better than those of the other two algorithms,
and both the PreGo and MORP algorithms did not
consider any user preferences. The route recommendation algorithm of the MORRBQ algorithm
considers the preferences of a given user for different
objective attributes, and the setting based on the given
user preferences reduces the travel time in Scenario
2 and reduces the safety risk.
As shown in Fig. 11, in Scenario 3, although the
route generated by the PreGo algorithm has a low
travel time, it has the highest consumption cost in
the two objective attributes of safety and COVID19 risks, which fails to satisfy the setting conditions
of Scenario 3; that is, it only considers safety and
COVID-19 risks and does not require the shortest

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

7023

Fig. 11. Route cost of the 4 algorithms on different target attributes
in Scenario 3.
Fig. 13. Route generation results of the 4 algorithms in Scenario
2.

route attributes and provide route suggestions in near
real time.

Fig. 12. Route generation results of the 4 algorithms in Scenario
1.

travel time. The route generated by the MORR algorithm has a high travel-time cost. The route generated
by the MORRBQ algorithm has low safety and
COVID-19 risks, which satisfy the user preference
settings in Scenario 3.
In conclusion, the PreGo algorithm generated
routes with longer travel time, higher safety risk, and
higher COVID-19 risk. The MORP algorithm provides the Pareto optimal route but does not consider
the user’s preference for different objective attributes.
Moreover, the MORP and PreGo algorithms require
a significant amount of computing time. The results
of the MORR algorithm are better than those of the
PreGo and MORP algorithms; however, the ␧-greedy
strategy of the MORR algorithm easily falls into a
local optimum in the process of finding the route. It
can be seen that the route generated by the MORRBQ route recommendation algorithm proposed in
this study can consider user preferences for different

5.4.5. Visualization results of multi-objective
route recommendation
Figures 12–14 show the recommended routes
generated by the four algorithms considering the
travel time, safety risk, and COVID-19 risk attributes
simultaneously in different scenarios. The red, yellow, green, and black routes are generated by the
MORRBQ, MORR, PreGo, and MORP algorithms,
respectively. Point A is the source node (starting
point), point B is the destination node (end point),
and the black marked point is the location of COVID19 cases. Considering the traffic accident data of New
York City as the data source of the thermal map, it can
intuitively show the road segments with high traffic
accidents, that is, a high safety risk. The brighter the
color, the higher is the safety risk of the road segment.
As can be observed from Fig. 12, under the setting conditions of Scenario 1, the routes generated by
the MORRBQ and MORR algorithms all avoid road
sections with high traffic accidents (i.e., high safety
risks) and high COVID-19 risk, and the routes generated by the MORP algorithm do not avoid areas with
high safety risks. However, the route generated by
the PreGo algorithm has high safety and COVID-19
risks.
The route results generated by the four algorithms
in Scenario 2 are shown in Fig. 13. The route generated by the MORRBQ algorithm avoids road sections
with high safety risk and has a short traffic time, which
satisfies the weight allocation set in Scenario 2. However, the routes generated by the MORR and MORP

7024

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

Fig. 14. Route generation results of the 4 algorithms in Scenario
3.

algorithms did not avoid areas with high safety risks,
and the routes generated by the PreGo algorithm consumed the maximum time among the four algorithms.
Figure 14 shows the route results generated by the
three algorithms in Scenario 3. It can be observed
that the MORRBQ algorithm considers the optimization objectives of safety and COVID-19 risks, and
the generated route has low safety and COVID-19
risks. Although the route generated by the MORR
algorithm has a low risk of COVID-19, it does not
avoid areas with high safety risks. The route generated by the MORP algorithm does not avoid the areas
with high safety and COVID-19 risks. Although the
route travel time generated by PreGo algorithm is
shorter, its safety and COVID-19 risks are the highest
compared with the other two algorithms.

6. Conclusion
Based on the reinforcement learning algorithm,
this study proposes a multi-objective route recommendation algorithm, MORRBQ, which integrates
user preferences. This algorithm not only adopts the
common route recommendation optimization objective, which is the travel time, but also adopts the
safety and COVID-19 risk objective attributes. Different objective attributes and their weight allocation
will result in different route recommendation results.
High-weighted travel time attribute will enable the
agent to generate a short distance-prior route, highweighted security risk attribute will enable the agent
to generate a safety-first route, and high-weighted
COVID-19 risk attribute will enable the agent to gen-

erate a route to avoid epidemic areas. Compared with
other algorithms, MORRBQ algorithm can balance
the impact of travel time, safety risk and COVID19 risk, and generate personalized recommendation
routes while following user preferences. The initialization operation of the Q-value table can effectively
shorten the iteration time of the algorithm and clarify
the agents’ choice of road node and action. The introduction of the dynamic exploration factor σenhances
the exploration ability of the MORRBQ algorithm at
the initial stage of iteration and assists the algorithm
to improve the final convergence degree when more
environmental feedback information is obtained. A
series of experimental results on real road network
data show that the recommended route generated by
the MORRBQ algorithm has a lower route cost than
other algorithms, and because of the unique Q-value
table search mechanism of the MORRBQ algorithm,
it can generate route recommendation results almost
in real time. In future work, we will consider the
application of a reinforcement learning algorithm in
scenic spot recommendation and organically combine it with the route recommendation work in this
study.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for
their useful comments and suggestions for this paper.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61702010,
61972439), the Anhui Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 2208085MF164),
and the University Natural Science Research Program
of Anhui Province (Grant No. KJ2021A0125).

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

H. Liu, J. Han, Y. Fu, J. Zhou, X. Lu and H. Xiong, Multimodal transportation recommendation with unified route
representation learning, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2020, 342–350.
A. Sarker, H. Shen, B. Murphy, R. Wang and A.J. Rindos,
Vehicle routing trifecta: data-driven route recommendation
system, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Computer Communications and Networks, 2019, 1–9.
B. Qu, W. Yang, G. Cui and X. Wang, Profitable Taxi Travel
Route Recommendation Based on Big Taxi Trajectory Data,
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
21(2) (2020), 653–668.
G. Hu, Y. Qin and J. Shao, Personalized travel route
recommendation from multi-source social media data,

Q. Yu et al. / Multi-objective route recommendation method based on Q-learning algorithm

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Multimedia Tools and Applications 79(45-46) (2020),
33365–33380.
E. Ghorbani, M. Alinaghian, G.B. Gharehpetian, S. Mohammadi and G. Perboli, A survey on environmentally friendly
vehicle routing problem and a proposal of its classification,
Sustainability (Switzerland) 12(21) (2020), 1–72.
Y. Zhang, R. Ma, D. Zhao, Y. Huangfu and W. Liu, A
Novel Energy Management Strategy based on Dual Reward
Function Q-learning for Fuel Cell Hybried Electric Vehicle,
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 69(2) (2021),
1537–1547.
Y. Jeong and T.K. Agrawal, E. Flores-García and M.
Wiktorsson, A reinforcement learning model for material
handling task assignment and route planning in dynamic
production logistics environment, Procedia CIRP 104(1)
(2021), 1807–1812.
R.K. Ganti, N. Pham, H. Ahmadi, S. Nangia and
T.F. Abdelzaher, GreenGPS: A participatory sensing
fuel-efficient maps application, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services, 2010, 151–164.
R. Yera and L. Martínez, Fuzzy tools in recommender systems: A survey, International Journal of Computational
Intelligence Systems 10(1) (2017), 776–803.
X. Cheng, A travel route recommendation algorithm based
on interest theme and distance matching, EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing 2021 (1) (2021), 1–10.
J. Wang, N. Wu and X. Zhao, Personalized route recommendation with neural network enhanced A* search algorithm,
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
1(1) (2021), 1–14.
H. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Fang, X. Chen and K. Zeng, Hybrid
route recommendation with taxi and shared bicycles, Distributed and Parallel Databases 38(3) (2020), 563–583.
R. Feng, B. Yao, X. Gu, M. Zhang and B. Yu, Environmental benefits mining based on data-driven taxi cruising
recommendation strategy, Journal of Cleaner Production
326 (2021), 129376.
H. Jia, J. Fang, N. Tan, X. Liu, Z. Huo and N. Ma, Contextaware route recommendation with weight learning through
deep neural networks, IEEE 2020 American Control Conference 2020, 4040–4045.
R.A. de Oliveira e Silva, G. Cui, S.M. Rahimi and X.
Wang, Personalized route recommendation through historical travel behavior analysis, GeoInformatica 26(3) (2022),
1–36.
S. Ji, Z. Wang, T. Li and Y. Zheng, Spatio-temporal feature fusion for dynamic taxi route recommendation via deep
reinforcement learning, Knowledge-Based Systems 205(1)
(2020), 106302–106313.

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

7025

D. Quercia, R. Schifanella and L.M. Aiello, The shortest path to happiness: Recommending beautiful, quiet, and
happy routes in the city, Proceedings of the 25th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media, 2014, 116–125.
A.M. Hendawi, A. Rustum and A.A. Ahmadain, Smart
personalized routing for smart cities, Proceedings of the
33rd International Conference on Data Engineering, 2017,
1295–1306.
L. Kang, B. Qi, D. Janecek and S. Banerjee, EcoDrive: A
mobile sensing and control system for fuel efficient driving,
Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking, 2015, 358–371.
A. Sarker, H. Shen and K. Kowsari, A Data-Driven
Reinforcement Learning Based Multi-Objective Route
Recommendation System, 2020 IEEE 17th International
Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems, 2020,
103–111.
C. Guo, B. Yang, O. Andersen, C.S. Jensen and K. Torp,
EcoSky: Reducing vehicular environmental impact through
eco-routing, IEEE 31st International Conference on Data
Engineering, 2015, 1412–1415.
X. Zheng, Y. Luo, L. Sun, Q. Yu, J. Zhang and S. Chen, A
novel multi-objective and multi-constraint route recommendation method based on crowd sensing, Applied Sciences
11(21) (2021), 10497–10511.
F. Huang, J. Xu and J. Weng, Multi-task travel route planning
with a flexible deep learning framework, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 22(7) (2020),
3907–3918.
S. Malik and D.H. Kim, Optimal travel route recommendation mechanism based on neural networks and particle
swarm optimization for efficient tourism using tourist
vehicular data, Sustainability (Switzerland) 11(12) (2019),
3357–3383.
S. Rani, K.N. Kholidah and S.N. Huda, A Development
of Travel Itinerary Planning Application using Traveling
Salesman Problem and K-Means Clustering Approach,
Proceedings of the 2018 7th International Conference on
Software and Computer Applications. 2018, 327–331.
A. Sarker, H. Shen and J.A. Stankovic, MORP: Data-Driven
Multi-Objective Route Planning and Optimization for Electric Vehicles, Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive Mobile
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 2018, 1–35.

Copyright of Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems is the property of IOS Press and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

