Reinforcement Learning for Vehicle Route
Optimization in SUMO
Koh Song Sang
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
S.S.Koh@2014.ljmu.ac.uk

Bo Zhou
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
B.Zhou@ljmu.ac.uk

Po Yang
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
B.Yang@ljmu.ac.uk

Zaili Yang
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
Z.Yang@ljmu.ac.uk

Hui Fang
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
H.Fang@ljmu.ac.uk

Jianxin Feng
Department of Computer Science,
Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
J.Feng@ljmu.ac.uk

Abstract – Urban traffic control becomes a major topic for urban
development lately as the growing number of vehicles in the
transportation network. Recent advances in reinforcement
learning methodologies have shown highly potential results in
solving complex traffic control problem with multi-dimensional
states and actions. It offers an opportunity to build a sustainable
and resilient urban transport network for a variety of objects, such
as minimizing the fuel consumption or improving the safety of
roadway. Inspired by this promising idea, this paper presents an
experience how to apply reinforcement learning method to
optimize the route of a single vehicle in a network. This experience
uses an open-source simulator SUMO to simulate the traffic. It
shows promising result in finding the best route and avoiding the
congestion path.
Index Terms — Reinforcement Learning, Traffic Control,
Transportation Network, Route Optimization

I.

INTRODUCTION

As the population of urban and vehicle number keep
increasing rapidly, the demand of the urban transportation
continues to grow. In this circumstance, traffic congestion
becomes one of the major problem in urban development. The
modern solution for traffic congestion aims to achieve an
autonomous, environmental and sustainable traffic control,
optimize each vehicle’s route in transportation network by
reducing their travel time to destinations.
Nowadays wireless sensor networks are common and
reliable which enable the Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle to
Roadside (V2R) or Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I)
communication. With the sharing data through the network,
observing and monitoring the state of the transportation would
be achievable. By accessing the real-time traffic data, the

vehicle traffic management system controller could response
instantly to control the urban traffic flow [1].
Route optimization is a general solution for Vehicle Routing
Problem (VRP) which is described as the problem of designing
optimal delivery or collection routes from one or several depots
to several geographically scattered cities or customers, subject
to side constraints [2].
As the complex nature of the urban transportation, the
vehicle routing problem is a complex problem which involves
many features that need to be considered. This paper used
reinforcement learning method and showed how it could be
applied to solve the vehicle routing problem. The framework of
reinforcement learning is to learn from model with optimal
policy based on its observation. Each action that the agent
would take will lead to a reward or punishment with the new
observation of the state. Through its learning progress, the
agent will learn a distributed routing policy that could
maximize the capacity of urban. This process could be treated
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [3].
This research uses SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility) as
the traffic simulator. SUMO is an open source, microscopic,
multimodal traffic simulator. It allows the user to simulate how
a specified traffic demand performs on a given road network.
SUMO is an excellent choice for urban traffic simulation as it
is able to perform an optimised traffic distribution method
based on vehicle type or driver behaviour. It is also able to
update the vehicle’s route if there is any congestion or if an
accident occurs, finding the best routing option to enhance
urban sustainability and resilience. It also supports Traffic
Control Interface (TraCI for short), which is a Python API that
treats the SUMO simulation as a server and allows the user to
gather data from a traffic simulation or modify the simulation.

This makes TraCI a perfect tool for performing Reinforcement
Learning in the SUMO simulator.
The remaining of the report is as follows: section 2 provides
a systematic review on the previous research on route
optimization. Section 3 shows how reinforcement learning could
be applied in SUMO. Section 4 presents an example of
reinforcement learning approach in SUMO, section 5 discusses
the future work and conclusion of this research.
II.

RELATED WORK

As mentioned in previous session, Vehicle routing problem
is a major challenge in urban transportation network. Finding
an optimal route is a general method for resolving Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP). In this session, we present a brief
review of related studies to search for the optimal route for
vehicle in transportation network.
In 1959, Dijkstra proposed a static algorithm to find the
shortest path in two nodes [4]. This approach is not considering
any extra factor such as congestion, vehicle amount etc. With
the nature of urban transportation network, the optimal route is
not always the shortest path between two nodes. Therefore,
ideal route optimization method should be considering the latest
state of the transportation network and make adaption in real
time.
Dorigo et al. [5] proposed Ant-colony algorithm which was
inspired by the natural behavior performed by ants in finding
food resources. In this natural phenomenon, ants leave
pheromone trails to allow other ants to track the path and
eventually find the food resources. Previous experiments have
proven that ants can find the shortest route between two
individual sections. Therefore, ant-colony algorithm is widely
applied to solve vehicle routing problem, although some
modifications have been applied depending on different
circumstances.
Kammoun et al. [6] however proposed an adaptive vehicle
guidance system which can search for the best path in a smarter
way by using real-time changes in the network. To achieve
dynamic traffic control and improve driver’s request
management, this method used three types of agents, which are:
• Intelligent vehicle-ant agent (IVAA): standing for a
vehicle and encapsulates a deliberative module for the
selection of the best itinerary alternative.
• Road Supervisor Agent (RSA): Representing a software
agent implanted in the server.
• City Agent (CA): Representing a software agent to
manage the road network in the city to obtain a better
exploitation of the network.
This method is focused on individual drivers and lack of
consideration for the bigger picture of urban transportation
network. It is difficult to manage a large, massive and complex
urban transportation network.
Cong et al. [7] developed a model to optimise dynamic traffic
routing by using a two-steps approach: network pruning and
network flow optimisation. In the network-pruning phase, ant
pheromone is removed after the best route is found by the
agents to increase exploration rate. In the flow optimisation
phase, which is based on Ant-Colony Optimization with the

stench pheromone and colored pheromone, the agents
correspond to the links selected in the network-pruning phase
only. Moreover, this two-steps approach effectively reduces the
computing burden when addressing complex and dynamic
traffic control problems.
With SUMO is a new growing tool for traffic simulation,
there are couple attempts to apply reinforcement learning in
SUMO in previous studies. Although as far as we concerned,
there are no recent study is applying reinforcement method for
route optimization in SUMO, the idea of how these studies
design and observe the state are very helpful.
David Isele [8] analyzed how the knowledge to
autonomously handle one type of intersection, represented as a
Deep Q-Network (DQN), translates to other types of
intersections. The DQN takes each step of simulation in SUMO
as a graphic input and analyzed how to handle the different type
of interception. Although this paper focus on analyzing
different type of interception rather than route optimization, it
provides very good idea to explain how to apply reinforcement
learning in SUMO.
Seyed Sajad Mousavi [9] proposed two reinforcement
learning algorithms (deep policy-gradient and value-function
based agents) which can predict the best possible tra c signal
for a tra c intersection. The policy-gradient based agent maps
its observation based on the snapshot of the current state of a
graphical tra c simulator directly to the control signal,
however value-function based agent first estimates values for
all legal control signals. Then the agent could make selection
depend on the highest value.
Wade Genders [10] proposed a deep neural network as a
traffic signal control agent (TSCA) that trained by using
reinforcement learning method to solve the traffic signal control
problem by developing an optimal control policy. He used a
new state space definition which named the discrete traffic state
encoding (DTSE), that contains more relevant information
compared to previous research’s state space definitions.
Cathy Wu [11] however proposed a method to do
benchmarking for the performance of classical (including handdesigned) controllers with learned policies (control laws) by
using reinforcement learning approach.
Giorgio Stampa [12] designed Deep-Reinforcement
Learning agent which is able to adapt automatically to current
traffic conditions and proposes tailored configurations that
attempt to minimize the network delay. However, it approaches
only focus on one vehicle rather than the whole urban
transportation network.
III.

REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IN SUMO

Simulation of Urban Mobility (or SUMO for short) is a
powerful simulator designed to handle a large load network and
specified traffic demand, including a vehicle route and car
following model. It also provides a lot of useful information
such as vehicle speed, model, and position.
One of the major features of SUMO is the Traffic Control
Interface (or TraCI for short), which is a Python API that treats
the SUMO simulation as a server and allows users to gain
information from a traffic simulation or modify the simulation.

TraCI enables an interface to allow third party systems (or
libraries) to integrate with the SUMO traffic simulation. This
session explains how a reinforcement learning method could
work with SUMO by using TraCl, and how this could benefit
urban traffic management.
Reinforcement learning as a machine learning technique has
led to very promising results as a solution for complex systems.
A reinforcement learning method is able to gain knowledge or
improve the performance by interacting with the environment
itself. The theory of reinforcement learning is inspired by
behavioural psychology, it gains reward after taking certain
actions under a policy in an environment. The goal of
reinforcement learning is to learn an optimal policy based on
the reward obtained by repeating the interaction with the
environment. This consistently optimises the policy and
eventually creates a solution.
A good example of the application of reinforcement learning
in a real-world situation is in urban traffic management. As the
number of vehicles within our urban transport network
increases, designing a smart traffic management system to
perform intelligent routing for vehicles is in high demand.
However, the complexity of the urban transportation network
causes a lot of challenges in traffic management, such as highspeed changes in traffic systems and the wide distribution of
vehicles on the roadway. To deal with these challenges, a
reinforcement learning approach would be useful as it has
already successfully proven that it is able to handle complex
optimisation problems.
As mentioned in the beginning of this session, the SUMO
simulator can enable third party systems to approach
reinforcement learning. In this case, TraCI will play the role of
the “convertor” between SUMO and the reinforcement learning
approach to establish this interaction. TraCI is able to retrieve
every piece of information in the simulation, including the
vehicle and network. This provides useful features for the
reinforcement learning agent to justify the states of the
environment. Based on the observation of the states, we could
set and assign the rewards accordingly and let reinforcement
learning optimise the policy based on the reward. After that, the
reinforcement learning agent will assign a new action to SUMO
through TraCI and continuously observe the environmental
state.
TraCI could be accessed using multiple programming
languages, with the most common language being Python. The
package tools/TraCl in the SUMO simulator allows users to
interact with SUMO using Python. This is advantageous as
Python is already a well-established script language for
machine learning, providing useful libraries (such as Numpy
and Pandas) whilst implementing a machine learning
algorithm.
The interaction between the reinforcement learning agent
and the environment via TraCI would be continued until it

reaches a terminal state, or the agent meets a termination
condition. Essentially, the reinforcement learning techniques
apply the Markov decision processes (MDPs). A MDP is
defined as a five-tuple < S, A, T, R, γ >, where S is the
collection of states, A is the set of actions which could change
the status, T is the transition function, which is the probability
of the state change under the certain action, R is the reward
function, and γ is known as the discount factor, which models
the importance of the future and immediate rewards.
Reinforcement learning optimises its policy by repeating the
following step: at each time step t, the reinforcement learning
agent perceives the state from state collection S and, based on
its observation, selects an action and executes it to lead the state
of the environment transition to the next state. Then, the agent
receives immediate reward R, observes the new state, and
updates the policy with the equation above including the
discounted reward γ.
In order to approach reinforcement learning in the SUMO
simulator, we need corresponding elements for a Markov
decision process in SUMO. The SUMO simulator uses default
routing method “DuaRouter” to generate route files for every
vehicle in the simulation. “DuaRouter” performs dynamic user
assignment (DUA) based on shortest path computation. The
reinforcement learning agent will replace the default routing
method with the optimal policy that it has learnt.
IV.

EXAMPLE

This post will demonstrate a simple simulation that applies
reinforcement learning approach in SUMO simulator by using
TraCI. This simulation is to show a vehicle learns how to arrive
its destination by selecting the right path to avoid traffic
congestion. It also shows how the vehicle optimise his path
selection policy based on the reward it receives. Below shows
the general process of this example:
s = state, a = action, r = reward, γ = discount factor
Initialize Q(s, a) arbitrary
Repeat (for each episode):
Initialize s
Repeat (for each step of episode):
Choose a from s using policy derived from Q
Take action a, observe r, s’
Q(s, a)  [r + γ max Q(s’, a’)]
s  s’
until s is terminal
First thing first, we need to prepare a network file which
contains the roadway information, and a route file which
contains the vehicle route information for building the
environment for simulation.

Figure 1

Figure 2
The figure 1 shows the roadway network of the simulation
which is generated by the .net file and .rou file. The 3 little
green rectangle shapes on the roadway are the trucks that block
the road and cause the congestion. The little triangle shape on
the left is the vehicle that like to arrive its destination, which is
on the right of the network.
However, figure 2 is the same network design as figure 1 but
shows the id of the edges that connects each node, which also
indicate the path that the vehicle would take. if a vehicle move
from left to right node or up to down node, we record the
vehicle takes the path with the positive edge ID, otherwise
(from right to left or down to up) we record the vehicle takes
the path with the negative edge ID. For instance, if a vehicle
moves from node A -> C -> F -> E -> B -> C and back to node
A, the taken path would be recorded as [“gneE0”, “gneE1”, “gneE15”, “-gneE6”, “gneE5”, “gneE0”].
The next step we control the SUMO simulator by using
TraCI library. Meanwhile, we can also connect to library for

reinforcement learning approach. In this case, numpy and
pandas libraries would be used. Numpy library is for supporting
multi-dimensional arrays and metrices along with a large set of
mathematical functions however pandas library is for data
manipulation and analysis. Both libraries are very widely used
by machine learning.
Before we start the simulation for learning, we initialised the
q-table. A q-table is an updatable table for path selection policy.
The value of the table would be updated every time when an
action is taken in order to optimise the policy. The table will
record every state of the environment and the probability of
taking which actions. The format of the q-table for this case is
shown below.
States
First Road
Second
Third Road
Road
[current
[score]
[score]
[score]
edge]

From table above we could see we set the edge ID as the stage
with the score of their 3 available moves. If vehicle enters to a
new edge that not covered in the q-table, we will record the edge
ID as a new record and assign it moves randomly and update
the score depend on next edge the vehicle enter.
We set the learning episode as 30, which mean the we will
run the simulation 30 times, each simulation will be end until
the vehicle on the left finds his way to destination or stuck in
the congestion. The vehicle starts from edge “gneE0”, aim to
arrive edge “gneE4” and try to avoid the congestion edges,
which are “gneE2”, “gneE6” and “gneE13”. Therefore, we give
reward when the vehicle arrive edge “gneE4” and give
punishment if the vehicle enters “gneE2”, “gneE6” and
“gneE13”.

Reinforcement learning make action move that based on qtable. After that it updates the q-table regarding the reward or
punishment it receives in the next stage by making that action.
Therefore, next time the it will act greedier by looking for the
action that contains higher score. In this case, we update the qtable score with the algorithm below:
q_table.[edge_id, action] += learning_ rate * (q_target q_predict) where discount factor is 0.1, q_target is the reward
or punishment that we receive in the next stage, and q_predict
is the current score for the particular action (initially 0).
After running the simulation 30 times, we can see the vehicle is
getting smarter to reach its destination by avoiding the
congestion path. Below shows the total path that be taken by
the vehicle in each simulation.

Figure 3
According Figure 3, we can see from the episode 1 to 10, we
can see the vehicle enters to the congestion path or taking longer
path to arrive destination. From episode 11 to 20, it is getting
smarter but still take longer path occasionally. From episode 21
to 30, it becomes very consistent to take shortest path to arrive
the destination without entering congestion path.

V.

FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION

With the real roadway situation contains more properties and
countless state to observe, the next stage we will design a neural
network to build a Deep Q-Network framework to cope with

more complex transportation network and take consideration
for all vehicles in the network.
To summarize this paper, We developed a simple program to
perform reinforcement learning in SUMO simulator via TraCI
and show that the vehicle is getting more intelligent to reach the
destination and avoid the congestion path. This proves that
reinforcement learning is applicable in SUMO for route
optimization and it performs well in result.
VI.

REFERENCES

[1] Kapileswar Nellore and Gerhard P. Hancke. A Survey on Urban Traffic
Management System Using Wireless Sensor Networks. January 2016.
[2] Gilbert Laporte. The Vehicle Routing Problem: An overview of exact and
approximate algorithms. 1991.
[3] Richard S. Sutton, Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An
Introduction. 2012
[4] E. Dijkstra: ‘ A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs’,
Numerische Mathematik, Vol. 1, pp. 269-271. 1959.
[5] Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., & Colorni, A. Ant System: Optimization by a
colony of cooperating agents. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics—Part B, 26(1), 29–41. 1996
[6] Kammoun, H.M., Kallel, I., Alimi, A.M. and Casillas, J. ‘An adaptive
vehicle guidance system instigated from ant colony behavior’, IEEE
International Conference on Systems Man and Cybernetics (SMC), pp.2948–
2955, IEEE.
[7] Zong, X., Xiong, S., Fang, Z. and Li, Q. (2010) ‘Multi-ant colony system
for evacuation routing problem with mixed traffic flow’, in IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp.1–6, IEEE. 2010.
[8] David Isele, Akansel Cosgun and Kikuo Fujimura, Analyzing Knowledge
Transfer in Deep Q-Networks for Autonomously Handling Multiple
Intersections. 2017
[9] Seyed Sajad Mousavi, Michael Schukat, Enda Howley. Traffic Light
Control Using Deep Policy-Gradient and Value-Function Based Reinforcement
Learning. 2017.
[10] Wade Genders, Saiedeh Razavi. Using a Deep Reinforcement Learning
Agent for Traffic Signal Control. 2016.
[11] Cathy Wu, Aboudy Kreidieh, Kanaad Parvate, Eugene Vinitsky,
Alexandre M Bayen. Flow: Architecture and Benchmarking for Reinforcement
Learning in Traffic Control. 2017.
[12] Giorgio Stampa, Marta Arias, David Sánchez-Charles, Victor MuntésMulero, Albert Cabellos. A Deep-Reinforcement Learning Approach for
Software-Defined Networking Routing Optimization. 2017

