Research Article

Vehicle–Infrastructure Cooperation
Framework for Vehicle Navigation and
Traffic Signal Control using Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Transportation Research Record
2026, Vol. 2680(1) 568–583
Ó The Author(s) 2025
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/03611981251359285
journals.sagepub.com/home/trr

Long Wang1 , Weibin Zhang1 , and Ziqi Yan1

Abstract
As the number of vehicles continues to rise, traffic congestion has become a significant factor affecting travel efficiency. The
development of intelligent connected technology offers new approaches for achieving coordinated optimization in road traffic. This study proposes a deep reinforcement learning-based vehicle–infrastructure cooperation framework to achieve cooperative control of vehicle navigation and traffic signals, aiming to minimize the impact of traffic congestion on road traffic
efficiency. The tasks of vehicle navigation and signal control are modeled as a partially observable Markov decision process.
Based on real-time road condition information, roadside agents can flexibly adjust signal phases, while vehicle agents determine the next routing step as vehicles approach intersections. Through communication cooperation, on-board units and
roadside units can acquire more comprehensive and accurate traffic status information. Rewards for the vehicle navigation
task, based on spatiotemporal dimensions, and for the pressure-based signal control task, ensure that reinforcement learning
agents continuously improve their traffic efficiency optimization capabilities during training. The proposed method was implemented and evaluated in the SUMO (Simulation of Urban MObility) simulator under low, medium, and high traffic demand
conditions and compared with other baseline methods. The study also analyzed the impact of reward design, the training
sequence, and the intelligent connectivity penetration rate on the effectiveness of the framework, demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed vehicle–infrastructure collaborative optimization framework in improving network
traffic efficiency.
Keywords
intelligent connected, vehicle–infrastructure cooperation, vehicle navigation, traffic signal control, deep reinforcement
learning

Because of the continually increasing number of vehicles
and limited road capacity, traffic congestion has become
a common issue faced by major cities. On one hand, congestion can lead to driver frustration and discomfort,
thereby increasing the likelihood of operational errors
while driving. On the other hand, excessive concentration
of traffic flow also heightens the risk of accidents (1, 2).
In addition, traffic congestion results in both time and
economic losses, with increased energy consumption further exacerbating environmental impacts, ultimately posing health risks to the population (3–5). Thus, finding
effective strategies to mitigate the effects of traffic congestion has become a focal point of concern across various sectors of society.

Traffic congestion in road networks can be broadly
categorized into two types: recurring congestion and
non-recurring congestion. Recurring congestion refers to
systematic congestion resulting from inadequacies in the
road network’s design, while non-recurring congestion is
characterized by sudden traffic jams caused by unexpected events, such as accidents or construction work
(6). The unpredictability of non-recurring congestion
1

School of Electronic and Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of
Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
Corresponding Author:
Weibin Zhang, wbin.zhang@outlook.com

Wang et al
contributes to a larger proportion of traffic delays (7).
To address the issue of traffic congestion, various measures are often considered, such as constructing new
roads or optimizing the road network’s structure; however, these strategies primarily alleviate recurring congestion. In response to the need for better management of
non-recurring congestion, researchers have begun exploring more flexible traffic control measures. Generally,
traffic management strategies can be divided into two
main categories: designing more effective traffic signal
control strategies (8–10) and guiding vehicles to divert
away from or avoid congested areas (11–13).
Traditional signal control methods, such as the
Webster method and MaxPressure (14), primarily utilize
heuristic approaches to optimize signal phase differences,
green time ratios, and cycles. However, these methods
lack the flexibility to adapt to dynamic traffic conditions.
Some studies have begun exploring the acquisition of
real-time traffic state information through sensors, followed by the application of reinforcement learning techniques for traffic signal control (15–17). The
development of sensor technology enables people to
obtain richer traffic data, thereby facilitating further traffic situation analysis and decision-making (18–20). Li
et al. (21) were among the first to employ the deep Q-network (DQN) to optimize traffic signals at individual
intersections, achieving promising results. Chen et al.
(22) designed a multi-intersection traffic signal control
method based on long short-term memory (LSTM) networks and the QMIX (Q-decomposition Multi-agent
Independent eXtension) algorithm (23). However, solely
focusing on optimizing signal control still yields limited
improvements in overall traffic efficiency.
Traditional vehicle routing algorithms, such as
Dijkstra’s algorithm (24) and A* (25), calculate the
shortest path based on the starting and ending points
considering the travel time. Similar to Google Maps,
vehicle navigation systems (VNSs) can access city-wide
traffic information to provide the fastest routes for individual drivers. However, these traditional navigation systems do not account for sudden changes in road traffic
conditions. Their low update frequency and limited coverage create significant limitations in dynamic traffic scenarios, and when multiple vehicles are navigated along
the same route, secondary congestion can occur (26).
Recent studies have approached vehicle navigation as a
series of re-routing decisions (27–29), continuously
adjusting routing strategies based on acquired traffic status information. Wang et al. (26) designed a practical
vehicle detour system that aids drivers in selecting the
most suitable next road by calculating cost function values, effectively reducing average travel time in simulation
experiments. However, these studies often overlook the
collaboration and communication between on-board

569
units and roadside units, which could provide vehicles
with richer real-time status data from nearby roads (30,
31). Furthermore, some works (27–29) focus solely on
single vehicles or specific starting points, making them
impractical for complex road traffic scenarios involving
multiple vehicles and varied starting points.
Traffic signal control and vehicle control are two critical factors influencing road traffic. Optimizing both to
enhance traffic flow on road networks would significantly contribute to the realization of a real-time, accurate, and efficient intelligent transportation system (32,
33). Some research has employed traditional mathematical methods to address the problem of coordinating the
optimization of traffic signals and vehicle trajectories
(34–38). However, on one hand, the complexity of the
collaborative optimization modeling increases significantly with the scale of the road network, leading to a
potential exponential growth in the number of parameters. On the other hand, we are still some distance
from the large-scale implementation of fully autonomous
driving, making it unrealistic to expect all vehicles to precisely control their trajectories. A more pragmatic
approach involves utilizing intelligent networking technologies to guide drivers on route navigation (11–13, 39,
40) or to provide speed recommendations (41–43). Cao
et al. (4) proposed a traffic management framework
based on pheromones, which integrates dynamic vehicle
re-routing strategies with traffic signal control. This
framework collects pheromone data through roadside
infrastructure agents to assess real-time traffic conditions
and predict road congestion levels, allowing for the allocation of alternative routes before vehicles enter congested roads. Nevertheless, many similar studies (4, 33,
35, 44) have encountered challenges in modeling the collaborative optimization of vehicle control and traffic signals, leading to excessive computation times that fail to
meet real-time requirements, especially when dealing
with large road networks and high traffic volumes.
This paper proposes a collaborative optimization
framework for vehicle navigation and traffic signal control based on deep reinforcement learning. By designing
the states and rewards of the agents appropriately, the
proposed framework leverages reinforcement learning
methods to optimize the traffic efficiency of the road network, thereby achieving a flexible and efficient vehicle–
infrastructure collaborative optimization process.
Many existing vehicle navigation algorithms are based
on traditional mathematical models or complex neural
network designs. The complexity of these methods tends
to increase rapidly with the expansion of the traffic network scale, and they place high demands on the computational power and operational performance of the
deployment platform. In this paper, we transform the
vehicle navigation task into a form of re-routing at each

570

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

intersection, which enables flexible vehicle navigation
through a lightweight reinforcement learning approach.
We have carefully designed the states and rewards of the
agents to enhance the performance of the proposed
framework.
On the other hand, much of the current research on
traffic efficiency optimization focuses solely on vehicle
control or traffic signal control. In contrast, this paper
models both vehicle navigation and traffic signal control
as partially observable Markov processes. By employing
vehicle-to-infrastructure cooperation, the on-board units
and roadside units can share richer state information,
thereby realizing a unified and coordinated traffic optimization process. This approach is conducive to better
optimizing the traffic efficiency of connected and automated vehicles. The primary contributions of this work
can be summarized as follows.






A comprehensive framework has been established
for routing navigation and traffic signal optimization when intelligent connected vehicles pass
through intersections based on vehicle–
infrastructure collaboration technology. On-board
and roadside units share perceived traffic states
through intelligent connected means. Vehicle
agents recommend the best next road for drivers,
while roadside agents automatically adjust the signal phase sequence at intersections.
Both the vehicle re-routing problem at intersections
and the signal control problem are modeled as
Markov decision processes. The structure of reinforcement learning agents is specifically designed to
learn optimal policy functions through continuous
training in the SUMO simulation environment. A
dual-tier spatiotemporal reward design enables
vehicle agents to learn policy functions that allow
faster arrival at destinations, while intersection
pressure is used as a reward to train roadside agents
to learn the next optimal signal phase.
Simulation experiments were conducted in road
network environments under light, medium, and
heavy traffic flow conditions to validate the effectiveness of the proposed vehicle–infrastructure
collaborative optimization framework. The performance was compared with several baseline
methods, taking into account the impact of
reward design, training sequence, and intelligent
connected vehicle penetration rates. The results
demonstrated that the proposed method can optimize road traffic networks more efficiently and
flexibly.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
the second section describes the characteristics of the

research problem and the overall structure of the collaborative optimization framework. The third section provides a detailed explanation of the specific design of the
proposed collaborative optimization framework, including the setting of reinforcement learning states and
rewards. The fourth section presents experimental validation of the proposed framework’s effectiveness in the
SUMO simulation environment. The fifth section summarizes the work done and discusses directions for future
research.

Problem Description
The objective of this study is to minimize traffic congestion within the road network through two main strategies: intersection signal control and vehicle re-routing.
This aims to reduce the average travel time of vehicles
while also minimizing computational demands. The traffic network (45) in this problem can be represented as
G = fN , V , E, Lg, where N denotes the intersection nodes
in the road network, V represents the vehicles present in
the network, E denotes the roads that connect intersections, and L signifies the connection relationships
between intersection nodes and vehicles (the term ‘‘vehicles’’ refers to connected vehicles approaching the intersection within a certain distance range). When a vehicle
approaches an intersection, its on-board unit communicates with the roadside unit to establish a connection
between the intersection node and the vehicle. An intersection can connect with multiple nearby vehicles. As illustrated in the 2 3 2 road network example in Figure 1,
intersections 1–4 belong to N, vehicles 1–4 belong to V,
roads 1–4 belong to E, and connections 1–4 belong to L.
As illustrated in Figure 2, within the framework
designed in this study, when a vehicle approaches an
intersection, its on-board unit establishes a connection
with the roadside unit and determines the next turn (left,
straight, or right) based on the traffic conditions of adjacent roads. The roadside intelligent agent at the intersection periodically adjusts the signal phases based on its
observations of the traffic conditions, thereby managing
the flow order of traffic on the connected roads.
Assuming that the intelligent connected vehicles
approaching the intersection and the traffic signals at the
intersection are controlled by independent intelligent
agents, and that the right-hand turn of the vehicle is not
controlled by the traffic light, along with sufficiently reliable and stable communication between the on-board
unit and the roadside unit, once the driver receives the
turning suggestion from the vehicle agent, they can execute the turning operation accurately and promptly. In
this framework, both sub-tasks (vehicle intelligent navigation and traffic signal control) can be viewed as partially observable Markov decision processes.

Wang et al

571

Figure 1. Diagram of the traffic network.

Figure 2. Integrated framework for vehicle navigation and traffic signal control.

The characteristics of the problem studied in this
study can be represented as hV , S, A, p, P, r, O, g, N ,
S 0 , A0 , p0 , P0 , r0 , O0 , g0 i, where V and N represent the sets
of vehicle agents and roadside agents near intersections in the road network, S and S# represent the sets
of global states of vehicle agents and roadside agents,
A and A# denote the joint actions of all vehicles and
roadside agents, p and p# are the policy functions of

vehicle and roadside agents based on local observations, P and P# represent the state transition probability distributions of the vehicle and roadside agents, r
and r# indicate the rewards obtained from the environment after the actions taken by vehicle and roadside agents, O and O# denote the local states
observable by each vehicle and roadside agent, and g
and g# are the discount factors used by vehicle and

572

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)
decision zone can be understood as a circular area near
the intersection, as shown in Figure 3, with a radius d
defined as follows:
d = min½lroad , vmax (vmax =a + tr )

Figure 3. Vehicle navigation task.

roadside agents to calculate the expected discounted
returns, respectively.
It is important to note that vehicle intelligent navigation and traffic signal control are not independent decision processes within this framework. On one hand, the
vehicle agent obtains information about the surrounding
traffic conditions through the roadside agent, while on
the other hand, the roadside agent gains advance knowledge of vehicle turning information from the vehicle
agent, enriching the state information perceived by both
parties. In addition, the goal of vehicle navigation is to
reduce travel time, while the objective of signal control is
to minimize congestion at the intersection. Appropriate
reinforcement learning reward settings can enable both
sub-tasks to work together toward improving the traffic
efficiency of the road network.

Methodology
In this section, we introduce the technical details of the
proposed framework, focusing on the design of states,
actions, and rewards for the vehicle and roadside agents.
We then describe the deep reinforcement learning algorithm employed and, finally, provide the pseudocode for
the algorithm.

Design of the Vehicle Agent
In this framework, each vehicle is considered as an independent intelligent agent. As the vehicle approaches the
intersection, the vehicle agent obtains real-time information about adjacent roads through the roadside unit and,
in conjunction with destination information, decides on
the next road it will take. Vehicles should make routing
decisions based on the latest road conditions; therefore, it
is stipulated that routing decisions are made only when
entering the decision zone at the intersection. The

ð1Þ

Let lroad represent the length of the current road, vmax
indicate the maximum allowable speed for vehicles on
the road, a denote the average acceleration of the vehicle,
and tr represent the average reaction time of the driver.
This configuration is intended to ensure that drivers have
adequate time to decelerate.
The specific design of the vehicle agent is as follows.
State: The state of the vehicle agent can be represented
by a six-tuple ½vr , nr , dr , p, ld , a, which can be divided into
two parts. The first part consists of state information
obtained through communication with the roadside unit,
including the average speed of vehicles on the road vr, the
vehicle density nr, dr indicating the distance to the destination after passing through the road segment (as illustrated in Figure 3, where B is the start point of an
adjacent road, C is the end point of that road, and D is
the endpoint of the destination road; dr is calculated as
the length of line segment BD minus the length of line
segment CD), and the current traffic signal phase p. The
second part contains the vehicle’s current positional
information relative to the destination, including the distance from the vehicle to the destination ld (represented
by the length of segment AD in Figure 3) and the angle a
between the line connecting the vehicle to the destination
and the horizontal line (as shown by angle a in Figure 3).
The first part of the state information represents the realtime status of the roads connected to the next intersection, including the current average vehicle speed, vehicle
density, and the proximity to the destination. This allows
connected vehicles approaching the intersection to gain
more road condition information, enabling better routing
decisions. The second part of the state information represents the current state of the vehicle, allowing the vehicle
to understand its relative position to the destination.
Actions: The actions are defined as the possible route
choices for the vehicle at the intersection. For example,
in Figure 3, the vehicle has three action choices: turning
left, going straight, and turning right. To avoid navigation failures, such as vehicles being directed to closed
roads at the network’s edge and subsequently being
unable to reach their destination, the framework implements rule constraints before executing each navigation
action. Specifically, if there is no direct path from the
selected next road to the destination, the action is modified to choose an alternative road that ensures a continuous path to the destination.
Reward: Some studies (27–29, 44) that utilize reinforcement learning algorithms for route selection at intersections often define the reward as the time interval between

Wang et al

573

two actions (Dt), thereby training vehicles to select routes
with shorter travel times. However, this approach has
limitations. The objective of vehicle navigation is not
only to minimize travel time but also to ensure reaching
the destination. Designing the reward based solely on the
time interval between two intersections may lead vehicles
to favor routes that are quicker with respect to travel
time, but shorter travel time does not necessarily mean
being closer to the destination; it could simply reflect
shorter road lengths. As depicted in Figure 3, longitudinal roads are generally shorter than lateral roads. When
the average speeds of vehicles on these roads are similar,
vehicles may continuously choose the longitudinal route,
which could result in delays in reaching the destination.
This study proposes a reward design that integrates
both temporal and spatial indicators. It takes into
account not only the time interval of the two actions (Dt)
but also the distance to the destination during travel
(Dd). Let us assume that when the vehicle agent executes
the first action, the distance to the destination is l1, and
when it performs the second action, the distance is l2. We
denote the difference between these two distances as Dd.
Thus, the reward r for the first action can be designed as
follows:
r = Dd=Dt

ð2Þ

This reward design encourages vehicles to preferentially select routes that are both faster and closer to the
destination, thereby reducing travel time while simultaneously approaching the destination more closely.
In some studies (27, 28), the navigation process of an
individual vehicle is often trained in isolation. However,
this approach can adversely affect the performance when
multiple vehicles are executing the navigation algorithm
simultaneously. In addition, training a single navigation
task from a specific starting point may also affect the
effectiveness of navigation tasks from multiple starting
points. Therefore, in our framework, the reinforcement
learning for vehicle navigation is conducted with a strategy that simultaneously trains all vehicle agents, and the
use of parameter sharing is employed to accelerate the
convergence of the algorithm.

Design of the Roadside Agent
Intelligent algorithms for traffic signal control can coordinate the vehicles across different lanes to improve traffic efficiency at urban intersections. If each intersection’s
roadside unit is regarded as an intelligent agent, these
roadside agents can observe traffic conditions and make
optimal actions to regulate traffic signals. Compared to
traditional methods, reinforcement learning-based traffic
signal control approaches can better adapt to dynamic
traffic conditions.

Currently, there are mainly two methods for addressing regional traffic signal control issues: one involves
centralized optimization of the traffic signals at each
intersection in the region, while the other employs appropriate state and reward designs to enable each intersection agent to optimize signals in a decentralized manner
(46). The use of centralized optimization methods can
lead to a rapid increase in computational complexity as
the scale of the road network grows. Therefore, our
framework adopts a decentralized control strategy for
traffic signals at each intersection.
Some reinforcement learning algorithms utilize complex state designs. However, such complexity not only
increases computational difficulty but also may not significantly enhance performance. To simplify state representation, inspired by previous research (46, 47), we have
incorporated ‘‘pressure’’ into the design of roadside
agents within the framework. ‘‘Pressure,’’ as a concept
from the maximum pressure control theory, can be simply understood as the difference in queue lengths between
upstream and downstream vehicles. It reflects the uneven
distribution of vehicles and achieves the goal of balancing
vehicle distribution by minimizing pressure, thereby optimizing the traffic throughput of the network.
In the framework presented in this study, the traffic
signals at each intersection are controlled by individual
agents. Roadside agents periodically select the next phase
of traffic lights based on the observed traffic conditions
at the intersection. The specific design of the reinforcement learning agent is as follows.
State: The state O# of the roadside agent can be
expressed as ½nl , p, nf . The variable nl represents the
number of vehicles on each inbound and outbound lane
within a certain range of the intersection, as observed by
sensors in the roadside unit (as illustrated by the 24 lanes
in Figure 4). The variable p denotes the current phase.
The variable nf represents the ratio of vehicle numbers in
various traffic flow directions determined through
vehicle–infrastructure communication (as shown by the
12 traffic flow directions in Figure 4: N-W, N-S, N-E, EN, E-W, E-S, S-E, S-N, S-W, W-S, W-E, and W-N). By
communicating with vehicle agents, the roadside agent
can ascertain the turning intentions of vehicles approaching the intersection, enabling it to better decide the next
optimal signal phase.
Action: The roadside agent determines the next optimal phase at fixed intervals, implementing phase updates
after a set period of yellow light. The action is defined as
the phase number of the current intersection’s traffic
light, with the example in Figure 4 showing eight phases.
Reward: Intersection pressure P is defined as the absolute difference between the number of vehicles approaching the intersection and those leaving it. It reflects the
degree of imbalance between the incoming and outgoing

574

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

Figure 4. Intersection schematic diagram.

vehicle density. The larger the value of P, the more
uneven the vehicle distribution (43, 44). It can be defined
as follows:


nin
nout
X

X

in
out 
P=
qi 
qi 
ð3Þ
i = 1

i=1
In the above equation, qin represents the length of the
vehicle queue in the incoming lane, while qout denotes
the length of the vehicle queue in the outgoing lane.
Here, nin represents the number of incoming lanes, while
nout denotes the number of outgoing lanes.
For example, the intersection pressure is
jð1 + 1 + 2 + 1Þ  ð3 + 2Þj = 0, as depicted in Figure 4.
In traffic signal control tasks, efforts should be made to
minimize intersection pressure to reduce the uneven distribution of vehicles and enhance network throughput.
Thus, the reward can be set as follows:
r0 =  P

ð4Þ

The roadside intelligent agent gathers real-time
intersection data via road sensors and communicates
with vehicle agents to acquire information about vehicles’ turning intentions. By determining the next optimal phase of the traffic lights, the agent aims to
balance vehicle distribution across the network by
minimizing intersection pressure, thereby increasing
network throughput.

Design of the Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
In this framework, our algorithm’s training process is
devised based on an improved DQN algorithm (48). The
DQN is a value-based model-free reinforcement learning
algorithm that utilizes a multi-layer neural network as a
function approximator to estimate the state–action value
function Q(s, a). The state–action value function can be
interpreted as an estimate of the expected cumulative
reward and can be defined as follows:
Q(s, a) = E½Rt jst = s, at = a

ð5Þ

where St represents the state at time t, capturing the traffic conditions when the agent makes a decision, and at
denotes the action taken at that time, which, for vehicle
agents, is the selected next road, and for roadside agents,
is the chosen next traffic light phase. The action with the
highest Q-value for the current state is selected as the
optimal action. According to the Bellman equation, the
Q-value of the current state–action pair can be represented as the sum of the immediate reward rt and the
maximum expected cumulative reward for the next step.
Thus, it can be expressed as follows:
Qt (st , at ) = rt + g max Qt + 1 (st + 1 , a)
a

ð6Þ

The discount factor g satisfies 0 \ g ł 1. To alleviate
the overestimation problem of the state–action value
function in the DQN algorithm, techniques from the

Wang et al

575

Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the reinforcement learning algorithm structure.
Note: TD = temporal difference.

double DQN (49) are utilized in our framework. In this
approach, two neural networks are set up: the current
network Q and the target network Q#. The current network Q is continually trained to approximate the state–
action value function, while the target network Q# has its
parameters u# periodically updated to match the parameters u of Q.
The parameters u of the current network are optimized by minimizing the temporal difference (TD) error,
which can be defined as follows:
0

L(u) = (rt + g max Qt + 1 (St + 1 , aju )  Qt (St , at ju)
a

ð7Þ

To enhance the convergence of the algorithm, the
techniques from dueling DQN (50) are employed, introducing the advantage function A. The advantage function is defined as the difference between the state–action
value function Q and the state value function V. The
state value function V can be understood as the expected
value of the action values for all possible actions.
Therefore, the state–action value function Q can be
expressed as follows:
Q(st , at ) = V (st ) + A(st , at )

ð8Þ

In the specific reinforcement learning structure, as illustrated in Figure 5, the network Q’s parameters are
trained by continuously sampling experiences (st, at, rt,

st + 1) from the replay memory. This process helps in decorrelating the experiences and stabilizes the training process. Furthermore, the parameters of the target network
Q# are updated every fixed number of steps. This periodic
update mechanism allows the network Q to approximate
the actual state–action value function more accurately.

Pseudocode
The framework encompasses two sub-tasks: vehicle navigation and traffic signal control. Both the decisions made by
vehicle agents and roadside agents affect the state of the
environment. This interdependence makes it challenging to
distinguish whether a particular environmental change
results from a vehicle navigation action or a traffic signal
control action. To mitigate the instability in the training
environment, a strategy of training these two tasks separately is employed. The vehicle agents are trained to complete the vehicle navigation task first and, then, within an
environment where vehicle agents are deployed, the roadside
agents are trained to complete the traffic signal control task.
The training process of the agents can be illustrated with
pseudocode in Algorithm 1. It is noteworthy that vehicle
agents make their decision to choose the next turn or road
on entering the decision zone at an intersection. On the
other hand, the roadside agents make their decision to select
the next optimal phase at the end of each phase duration.

576

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for the training process of
reinforcement learning agents
1 for episode in 1: Ndo
2
Initialize parameters, replay memory M and reset the
environment.
3
for i in 1: T do
4
if agents need to make decisions then
5
Retrieve the state st from the environment
6
With probability 2 randomly select action at
7
Otherwise at = arg max Q(st , a; u)
a

8

Execute actions at, obtain observe st + 1 and reward rt
from the environment.
9
Store the transition (st, at, rt, st + 1) in replay memory M.
10
end
11
if len(M) threshold and t% training interval T1 = 0 then
12
Sample a batch from replay memory M.
13
Update the network Q’s parameters u based on the
TD loss.
14
end
15
if t% update interval T2 = 0 then
16
Update u# of target network Q# with u of training
network Q
17
end
18
end
19 end

Datasets
As shown in Figure 6, we selected a road network from
an open-source dataset, specifically the Grid-4 3 4 network (51), for our simulation environment. In this setup,
each road segment is 300 m long and has three lanes. The
grid comprises a total of 16 intersections, with each intersection equipped with a roadside agent responsible for
controlling the traffic signals
To evaluate the performance of the proposed framework under varying levels of traffic demand, we utilized
the SUMO script randomTrips.py to randomly generate
vehicle routing files corresponding to low, medium, and
high traffic demands. Specifically, these routing files represent scenarios where a maximum of 500, 1000, and 1500
vehicles enter the road network within a 30-min period,
respectively. In addition, to simulate the uneven traffic
efficiency across different roads in the network, we randomly lowered the maximum speed limits on certain road
segments. This adjustment was made to reflect real-world
conditions, such as road congestion or construction work,
that may lead to reduced speed limits. By creating this
more complex training environment, we aim to provide
reinforcement learning agents with challenging scenarios
that require adaptive decision-making strategies.
To validate the performance of our proposed method
using real-world traffic data, we selected the Hangzhou4 3 4 dataset (51) as an example. The Hangzhou-4 3 4
road network has a structure similar to the Grid-4 3 4 network, comprising 16 signalized intersections. However,
the lengths of all N-S roads are 600 m, while the lengths of
all W-E roads are 800 m. In addition, we extracted 30 min
of real-world traffic flow data as the traffic demand, with
a total of 1660 vehicles entering the network.

Experiment Settings

Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the simulated road network.

Experiment and Discussion
We evaluated the proposed method using the SUMO
simulation software, which is an open-source microscopic
traffic simulation tool designed for modeling urban traffic
flows. By leveraging the TRACI (traffic control interface)
provided by the SUMO simulator, we can obtain realtime traffic state information from the simulation environment. In addition, we can execute actions within the
simulation environment and receive feedback in the form
of rewards. This enables us to effectively train and assess
the performance of the reinforcement learning agents.

Evaluation Metrics. The framework presented in this study
includes two sub-tasks: vehicle navigation and signal
control. We selected average travel time and effective
throughput of the road network to evaluate performance. Average travel time refers to the mean travel time
of all vehicles in the road network and is one of the most
commonly used evaluation metrics in the traffic field
(52). Effective throughput in this study refers to the number of vehicles that successfully reach their destination,
excluding those that arrive at incorrect endpoints or are
still navigating in the road network.
Compared Methods. We compared the effectiveness of the
proposed method with other baseline methods, including
some traditional approaches, reinforcement learningbased methods, and their combinations.
Dijkstra’s algorithm + fixed time: Dijkstra’s algorithm is used for the vehicle navigation task, while the

Wang et al

577

Figure 7. Training performance of vehicle navigation agents.

Figure 8. Training performance of signal control agents.

fixed time method is employed for signal control.
Dijkstra’s algorithm is a classic path-planning algorithm
that always selects the shortest path. The fixed time
method sequentially switches phases according to a predetermined schedule, with each phase set to last 30 s.
DRL-Navigation + fixed time: For the vehicle navigation task, we employed DRL-Navigation, while the
fixed time method was used for signal control. DRLNavigation (28) constructs a real-time intelligent vehicle
routing and navigation system based on reinforcement
learning by framing the task as a sequence of decisionmaking processes.
Dijkstra’s algorithm + PressLight: For the vehicle
navigation task, we utilized Dijkstra’s algorithm, and for
signal control, the PressLight method was adopted.
PressLight (47) links reinforcement learning with the
maximum pressure approach, designing a reinforcement
learning method for traffic signal control at multiple
intersections.
DRL-Navigation + PressLight: For the vehicle navigation task, we used DRL-Navigation, and the
PressLight method was employed for signal control.

the reward is set to 0.99, the learning rate for training is
set to 0.0005, and the mini-batch size is set to 128.

Parameter Settings. In this experiment, the duration of
each green light phase is set to 10 s, with a 3 s yellow light
duration during each phase transition. The decision zone
radius for intelligent connected vehicles at intersections
is set to 150 m. The MLPs (multi-layer perceptrons) of
the reinforcement learning agent consist of two hidden
layers, with the first hidden layer containing 100 neurons
and the second hidden layer containing 100 neurons. The
model uses the ReLU (rectified linear unit) as the activation function and employs RMSprop (root mean square
propagation) as the optimizer. The discount factor for

Performance Evaluation
We compared the experimental performance of the proposed framework under low, medium, and high traffic
demand conditions, while also evaluating its effectiveness
against other intelligent vehicle navigation and signal
control algorithms.
Performance under Different Traffic Flows. The framework
consists of two sub-tasks: vehicle navigation and signal
control. We first train the vehicle navigation task in
environments with varying traffic demand levels, and
then deploy the trained vehicle agent into the training
environment of the roadside agent to continue training
for the signal control task. Traffic flow 1, traffic flow 2,
and traffic flow 3 correspond to environments with a
maximum of 500, 1000, and 1500 vehicles entering,
respectively, representing light, medium, and high traffic
demand conditions.
We first trained the vehicle navigation task in an environment with fixed signal timing, and then deployed the
trained vehicle agent into a simulation environment to
begin training the signal control task. At the initial stage
of training the signal control task, the traffic signals were
relatively chaotic and random, resulting in a still relatively low initial traffic efficiency. From Figures 7 and 8,
it is evident that in training environments with different
traffic flows, the average travel time of vehicles in the
road network significantly decreases and converges as the
training process progresses. By adopting a multi-agent
collaborative training and parameter sharing strategy,

578

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

Table 1. Comparison of Experimental Effects with Other Baseline Methods on the Grid-434 Dataset
Average travel time (s)

Effective throughput

Different methods

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

Dijkstra’s algorithm + fixed time
DRL-Navigation + fixed time
Dijkstra’s algorithm + PressLight
DRL-Navigation + PressLight
Our method

356.36
286.48
249.72
143.86
239.99

365.21
290.47
254.72
178.25
246.61

391.29
295.80
268.70
269.60
253.62

387
69
433
123
436

772
139
860
237
873

1099
212
1281
316
1301

Table 2. Comparison of Experimental Effects with Other
Baseline Methods on the Hangzhou-434 Dataset
Different
methods
Dijkstra’s algorithm + fixed time
DRL-Navigation + fixed time
Dijkstra’s algorithm + PressLight
DRL-Navigation + PressLight
Our method

Average travel
time (s)

Effective
throughput

450.10
407.08
339.23
315.28
322.02

1167
212
1393
177
1410

the model exhibits a relatively fast convergence speed
and strong optimization performance, with both vehicle
navigation and signal control tasks leading to a marked
improvement in road network traffic efficiency.
However, it is also apparent that while the training
results of the model are quite noticeable under various
traffic flows, the training environment under higher traffic flows is relatively more complex and unstable. This
complexity results in a slightly slower convergence speed
for the model in high-traffic environments compared to
lower traffic scenarios, leading to a marginally longer
average travel time even after convergence.
Performance of Experiments with Different Methods.
Compared to other traditional methods and reinforcement learning-based approaches, the framework we proposed is not only relatively lightweight with respect to
network structure design but also vehicle–infrastructure
collaborative technology allows intelligent agents to
acquire richer state information, enabling them to make
better real-time decisions. For example, DRLNavigation only optimizes vehicle routing selection and
considers reward design solely from a temporal perspective, and PressLight solely optimizes traffic signal design
at intersections without considering the interaction with
vehicles near the intersection. As shown in Table 1 (traffic flows 1–3 represent light, medium, and high traffic
demand conditions, respectively, with maximum vehicle
entries of 500, 1000, and 1500), our proposed method
demonstrates overall superior optimization effects on

road network traffic efficiency compared to other methods. It performs well across various metrics, such as
average vehicle travel time and effective throughput.
Specifically, compared to the traditional shortest path
navigation and fixed signal control scheme (Dijkstra’s
algorithm + fixed time), our method reduces average
travel time by 33.48% and increases effective throughput
by 15.59%.
We also conducted comparative experiments on the
real-world traffic dataset (the Hangzhou-4 3 4 dataset).
As shown in Table 2, our method achieved overall better
traffic optimization results, such as average vehicle travel
time and effective throughput. Specifically, compared to
the traditional shortest path navigation and fixed signal
control scheme (Dijkstra’s algorithm + fixed time), our
method reduces average travel time by 28.46% and
increases effective throughput by 20.82%.
It is noteworthy that the DRL-Navigation algorithm, which utilizes reinforcement learning to address
vehicle navigation issues, only considers time-based
reward settings while neglecting spatial reward considerations. While it successfully reduces average travel
time, the effective throughput is significantly lower
than that of our method. For instance, the ‘‘DRLNavigation + PressLight’’ method achieves lower
average travel times than our approach under low and
medium traffic flows and the real traffic flow of the
Hangzhou-4 3 4 dataset. However, its effective throughput is less than one third of ours. This indicates that,
because of the lack of spatial reward guidance during
training, a substantial number of vehicles are directed
to incorrect destinations. Such performance is clearly
inadequate to meet the requirements for effective
navigation.

Study of the Framework
This section discusses some variants of the proposed
approach, including the impact of different reward factors on vehicle navigation tasks, the effects of the training sequence and penetration rates for the navigation
task, and the signal control task.

Wang et al

579

Table 3. Impact of Different Reward Factors on Vehicle Navigation Tasks
Average travel time (s)

Effective throughput

Different rewards

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

r1 = 1=Dt
r2 = Dd
r3 = Dd=Dt

350.96
356.73
338.13

357.58
363.72
343.11

381.83
383.52
367.02

395
397
401

773
780
804

1141
1147
1162

spatial factor (considering only Dd), and r3 is the reward
based on both temporal and spatial factors (considering
both Dt and Dd).
As can be seen from the analysis of Table 3, the
reward design of r1 lacks spatial guidance. Consequently,
vehicles may disregard the proximity to the destination
when selecting the next road, resulting in a longer average travel time and lower effective throughput to reach
the destination. While r2 exhibits effective throughput
comparable to r3 across different traffic volumes, its average travel time is consistently longer than that of r3. This
indicates that the lack of a temporal factor in the reward
design of r2 prevents vehicles from reaching their destinations more quickly. In summary, the reward design r3,
which incorporates both temporal and spatial metrics,
achieves superior vehicle navigation performance.
Figure 9. Average travel time under different training sequences.

Ablation Studies on Reward Design for Vehicle Agents. As vehicles approach intersections, the vehicle agents make decisions on which road to proceed to based on the observed
state information, thereby completing the navigation
task. This paper proposes a reinforcement learning
reward design that incorporates both spatial and temporal dimensions. To better investigate the impact of different reward factors on the vehicle navigation task, we
conducted ablation studies to analyze the effects of various reward designs under light, medium, and high traffic
demand conditions. In addition, to more clearly highlight the impact of different reward designs on vehicle
navigation, we removed the traffic signal control task in
this experiment.
Table 3 presents the experimental results of the vehicle
navigation task under different reward designs, reflecting
the impact of various reward factors on the navigation
task. Here, Dt denotes the time interval between two consecutive actions taken by the vehicle agent, and Dd represents the difference in distance to the destination between
two consecutive actions. The reward designs are as follows: r1 is the reward based solely on the temporal factor
(considering only Dt), r2 is the reward based solely on the

Effect of Training Order. Since the actions of vehicle navigation and traffic signal control both influence the road
network’s traffic and subsequently alter traffic conditions, we adopted a strategy of training the vehicle navigation task and the signal control task separately to
reduce the instability of the training environment and
the complexity of the training process. In this section, we
discuss the impact of the training order of the two tasks
on the overall training effectiveness.
As shown in Figures 9 and 10, ‘‘order 1’’ refers to the
training sequence where the vehicle navigation task is
trained first, followed by the signal control task. In contrast, ‘‘order 2’’ involves training the signal control task
first.
The results indicate that the model under ‘‘order 1’’
consistently outperforms that under ‘‘order 2’’ across different traffic volumes, with a significant reduction of
approximately 21.65% in average travel time. Training
in ‘‘order 2’’ can create an unstable environment for vehicle navigation because of dynamic signal control actions,
whereas ‘‘order 1’’ helps reduce interference from signal
control on navigation training, leading to better overall
performance. Consequently, our framework adopts the
sequence of training the vehicle navigation task before
the signal control task.

580

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

Figure 10. Effective throughput under different training
sequences.

according to predetermined shortest routes, and nonconnected roadside units can only switch phases according to a fixed phase sequence.
As shown in Table 4 (traffic flows 1–3 represent light,
medium, and high traffic demand conditions, respectively, with maximum vehicle entries of 500, 1000, and
1500), the experimental results show that under different
traffic demands, as the penetration rate of intelligent networking increases, our collaborative optimization framework demonstrates increasingly significant improvements
in road network traffic efficiency. The average travel time
of vehicles continually decreases, and effective throughput continually increases. Notably, with respect to average travel time, full connectivity leads to a reduction of
approximately 33.48% compared to scenarios without
connectivity, with larger optimization gains observed at
higher traffic flow levels.

Conclusion and Outlook
Impact of Different Penetration Rates. In the framework
designed in this study, on-board units and roadside units
communicate and collaborate through intelligent connected technologies. The driver or autonomous driving
system selects the best route based on prompts from the
vehicle agent, while the roadside agent periodically determines the next optimal phase for traffic signals at intersections. However, the full widespread adoption of
intelligent connectivity is a gradual process. In this section, we experimentally compare the framework’s performance at different levels of intelligent connectivity
penetration. Intelligent connectivity penetration refers to
the proportion of connected vehicles and roadside units,
which can include both connected human-driven and
connected autonomous vehicles.
In our experiments, we randomly assigned connected
communication capabilities to certain vehicles and roadside agents at intersections based on the penetration rate
of intelligent networking. Only connected vehicles and
roadside units can communicate and collaborate to perform intelligent vehicle navigation and traffic signal control tasks. Non-connected vehicles can only travel

This study proposes a collaborative optimization framework for vehicle navigation and traffic signal control
based on deep reinforcement learning. By modeling the
navigation and signal control processes as a partially
observable Markov decision process, vehicle agents and
roadside agents can determine the optimal next action
based on dynamic traffic information (vehicle agents
decide which road to turn onto when approaching intersections, while roadside agents periodically determine the
next optimal signal phase). Through the communication
and collaboration between vehicle and roadside agents,
the reinforcement learning agent accesses richer real-time
state information. The time–space vehicle navigation
rewards and pressure-based traffic signal control rewards
ensure the agent continually optimizes traffic efficiency
in the road network. The proposed method is validated
in a SUMO simulation environment under various traffic demands, and comparisons are made with traditional
and reinforcement learning-based baseline methods.
Several variations of the proposed method are discussed,
demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness of the
lightweight collaborative framework.

Table 4. Performance at Different Penetration Rates
Average travel time (s)

Effective throughput

Penetration rates

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 3

0%
25%
50%
75%
100%

356.36
342.51
325.65
295.48
239.99

365.21
331.44
303.05
261.55
246.61

391.29
342.72
327.69
273.97
253.62

387
399
401
414
436

772
806
828
863
873

1099
1181
1200
1279
1301

Wang et al
Because of practical constraints, this study only conducted experimental validation in a simulation environment, which may not fully reflect real traffic conditions.
Therefore, further validation and adjustments are necessary during actual deployment. In addition, while vehicle
control and traffic signal control are both crucial for
improving traffic efficiency, this study focuses solely on
dynamic routing for vehicles. Future work could explore
more refined vehicle control strategies, such as optimizing vehicle behavior when approaching intersections, to
further enhance traffic efficiency and safety.
Moreover, in this research, the communication
between vehicle agents and roadside agents is assumed to
be ideally reliable and stable. Future studies should
address how to ensure the reliability of V2X (vehicle-toeverything) communication and investigate the specific
impact of communication quality on vehicle–
infrastructure collaboration processes.

581

2.

3.

4.

5.

Author Contributions

6.

The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study
conception and design: L. Wang, W. Zhang; data collection: L.
Wang, Z. Yan; analysis and interpretation of results: L. Wang;
draft manuscript preparation: L. Wang, W. Zhang, Z. Yan. All
authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of
the manuscript.

7.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

8.

The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
9.

Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article:
This research was sponsored by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant 71971116).

10.

ORCID iDs
Long Wang
https://orcid.org/0009-0009-2224-0009
Weibin Zhang
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0701-9690
https://orcid.org/0009-0004-2694-2378
Ziqi Yan

11.

12.

Data Accessibility Statement
Some or all data, models, or code that support the findings of
this study are available from the corresponding author by
request.

13.

References
1. Chen, J., Z. Pu, N. Zheng, X. Wen, H. Ding, and X. Guo.
A Novel Generative Adversarial Network for Improving
Crash Severity Modeling with Imbalanced Data.

14.

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
Vol. 164, 2024, p. 104642.
Li, S., Z. Pu, Z. Cui, S. Lee, X. Guo, and D. Ngoduy.
Inferring Heterogeneous Treatment Effects of Crashes on
Highway Traffic: A Doubly Robust Causal Machine
Learning Approach. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies, Vol. 160, 2024, p. 104537.
Zhang, S., Y. Yao, J. Hu, Y. Zhao, S. Li, and J. Hu. Deep
Autoencoder Neural Networks for Short-Term Traffic
Congestion Prediction of Transportation Networks. Sensors, Vol. 19, No. 10, 2019, p. 2229.
Cao, Z. G., S. W. Jiang, J. Zhang, and H. L. Guo. A Unified Framework for Vehicle Rerouting and Traffic Light
Control to Reduce Traffic Congestion. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 18, No. 7, 2017,
pp. 1958–1973.
Li, Y., Z. Pu, P. Liu, T. Qian, Q. Hu, J. Zhang, and Y.
Wang. Efficient Predictive Control Strategy for Mitigating
the Overlap of EV Charging Demand and Residential
Load Based on Distributed Renewable Energy. Renewable
Energy, Vol. 240, 2025, p. 122154.
Collins, M., S. Etzioni, and E. Ben-Elia. Travel Behavior
and System Dynamics in a Simple Gamified Automated
Multimodal Network. Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice, Vol. 183, 2024, p. 104060.
Sun, F. Z., A. Dubey, and J. White. DxNAT—Deep
Neural Networks for Explaining Non-Recurring Traffic
Congestion. Proc., 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (Big Data), Boston, MA, IEEE, New York,
2017, pp. 2141–2150.
Wang, X., A. Taitler, I. Smirnov, S. Sanner, and B. Abdulhai. EMARLIN: Distributed Coordinated Adaptive Traffic Signal Control with Topology-Embedding Propagation.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2024. 2678: 189–202.
Ye, B. L., R. T. Sun, W. M. Wu, B. Chen, and Q. Yao.
Traffic Signal Control Method Based on Asynchronous
Advantage Actor-Critic. Journal of Zhejiang University
(Engineering Science), Vol. 58, No. 8, 2024,
pp. 1671–1680.
Huang, W., X. Y. Zhang, S. C. Li, and J. Zhao. A Model
Bias Learning Approach for Adaptive Traffic Signal Control. Journal of Railway Science and Engineering, Vol. 21,
No. 6, 2024, pp. 2229–2240.
Lu, S. F., J. Wang, G. H. Liu, and W. Shao. Macroscopic
Fundamental Diagram of Urban Road Network Based on
Traffic Volume and Taxi GPS Data. Highway Traffic Science, Vol. 31, No. 9, 2014, pp. 138–144.
Huo, J., X. Wen, L. Liu, L. Wang, M. Li, and Z. Lu.
CHRT: Clustering-Based Hybrid Re-Routing System for
Traffic Congestion Avoidance. China Communications,
Vol. 18, No. 7, 2021, pp. 86–102.
Yan, L. P., W. B. Hu, H. Wang, Z. Y. Qiu, and B. Du.
Dynamic Real-Time Algorithm for Multi-Intersection
Route Selection in Urban Traffic Networks. Journal of
Software, Vol. 27, No. 9, 2016, pp. 2199–2217.
Varaiya, P. Max Pressure Control of a Network of Signalized Intersections. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 36, 2013, pp. 177–195.

582
15. Zhang, W. B., C. Yan, X. F. Li, L. L. Fang, Y. J. Wu, and
J. Li. Distributed Signal Control of Arterial Corridors
Using Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 24,
No. 1, 2022, pp. 178–190.
16. Chen, D., T. Xu, S. Ma, X. Gao, and G. Zhao. Research
on Intelligent Signal Timing Optimization of Signalized
Intersection Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning Using
Floating Car Data. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2024. 2678: 1126–
1147.
17. Yan, L. P., L. L. Zhu, K. Song, Z. H. Yuan, Y. J. Yan, Y.
Tang, and C. Peng. Graph Cooperation Deep Reinforcement Learning for Ecological Urban Traffic Signal Control. Applied Intelligence, Vol. 53, No. 6, 2023,
pp. 6248–6265.
18. Chen, X., J. Zheng, C. Li, B. Wu, H. Wu, and J. Montewka. Maritime Traffic Situation Awareness Analysis via
High-Fidelity Ship Imaging Trajectory. Multimedia Tools
and Applications, Vol. 83, No. 16, 2024, pp. 48907–48923.
19. Chen, X., H. Wu, B. Han, W. Liu, J. Montewka, and R.
W. Liu. Orientation-Aware Ship Detection via a Rotation
Feature Decoupling Supported Deep Learning Approach.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 125,
2023, pp. 1–16.
20. Li, S., W. Wu, X. F. Ma, M. Zhong, and M. Safdar. Modelling Medium- and Long-Term Purchasing Plans for Environment-Orientated Container Trucks: A Case Study of
Yangtze River Port. Transportation Safety and Environment, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2023, p. tdac043.
21. Li, L., Y. Lv, and F. Y. Wang. Traffic Signal Timing via
Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica, Vol. 3, No. 3, 2016, pp. 247–254.
22. Chen, X. Y., G. Xiong, Y. Lv, Y. Y. Chen, B. Song, and
F.-Y. Wang. A Collaborative Communication-Qmix
Approach for Large-Scale Networked Traffic Signal Control. Proc., 2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), Indianapolis, IN, IEEE,
New York, 2021, pp. 3450–3455.
23. Rashid, T., M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J.
Foerster, and S. Whiteson. Monotonic Value Function
Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 21, No.
178, 2020, pp. 1–51.
24. Dijkstra, E. W. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion
with Graphs Numer. Numerische Mathematik, Vol. 1, No.
1, 1959, pp. 269–271.
25. Hart, P. E., N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael. A Formal Basis
for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths.
IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics, Vol.
4, No. 2, 1968, pp. 100–107.
26. Wang, S., S. Djahel, Z. H. Zhang, and J. McManis. Next
Road Rerouting: A Multiagent System for Mitigating
Unexpected Urban Traffic Congestion. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 17, No. 10,
2016, pp. 2888–2899.
27. Geng, Y. Z., E. W. Liu, R. Wang, Y. M. Liu, W. X. Rao,
S. J. Feng, Z. Dong, Z. R. Fu, and Y. F. Chen.. Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Dynamic Route Planning for

Transportation Research Record 2680(1)

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Minimizing Travel Time. Proc., 2021 IEEE International
Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), Montreal, QC, Canada, IEEE, New York, 2021,
pp. 1–6.
Koh, S., B. Zhou, H. Fang, P. Yang, Z. L. Yang, Q. Yang,
L. Guan, and Z. G. Ji. Real-Time Deep Reinforcement
Learning Based Vehicle Navigation. Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 96, 2020, p. 106694.
Wang, Z., and S. Wang. XRouting: Explainable Vehicle
Rerouting for Urban Road Congestion Avoidance Using
Deep Reinforcement Learning, Proc., 2022 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), Pafos, Cyprus,
IEEE, New York, 2022, pp. 1–7.
Wang, W. B., and W. B. Zhang. CRRFNet: An Adaptive
Traffic Object Detection Method Based on Camera and
Radar Radio Frequency Fusion. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 166, 2024, p. 104791.
Chen, H., V. K. Bandaru, Y. Wang, M. A. Romero, A.
Tarko, and Y. Feng. Cooperative Perception System for
Aiding Connected and Automated Vehicle Navigation and
Improving Safety. Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board, 2024. 2678:
1498–1510.
Feng, L., X. Zhao, Z. J. Chen, and L. Song. An Adaptive
Coupled Control Method Based on Vehicles Platooning for
Intersection Controller and Vehicle Trajectories in Mixed
Traffic. IET Intelligent Transport Systems, Vol. 18, No. 8,
2024, pp. 1459–1476.
Zheng, S., Y. G. Liu, K. Fu, R. R. Li, and H. T. Yang.
Optimization of Isolated Intersection Signal Timing and
Trajectory Planning Under Mixed Traffic Environment:
The Flexible Catalysis of Connected and Automated Vehicles. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
Vol. 640, 2024, p. 129668.
Feng, Y. H., C. H. Yu, and H. X. Liu. Spatiotemporal
Intersection Control in a Connected and Automated Vehicle Environment. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 89, 2018, pp. 364–383.
Yu, C. H., Y. H. Feng, H. X. Liu, W. J. Ma, and X. G.
Yang. Integrated Optimization of Traffic Signals and Vehicle Trajectories at Isolated Urban Intersections. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, Vol. 112, 2018,
pp. 89–112.
Jiang, Y. S., B. Zhao, M. Liu, and Z. H. Yao. A Two-Level
Model for Traffic Signal Timing and Trajectories Planning
of Multiple CAVs in a Random Environment. Journal of
Advanced Transportation, Vol. 1, 2021, p. 9945398.
Guo, Y., and J. Q. Ma. DRL-TP3: A Learning and Control
Framework for Signalized Intersections with Mixed Connected Automated Traffic. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies, Vol. 132, 2021, p. 103416.
Ma, W. J., J. J. Li, and C. H. Yu. Shared-Phase-DedicatedLane Based Intersection Control with Mixed Traffic of
Human-Driven Vehicles and Connected and Automated
Vehicles. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 135, 2022, p. 103509.
Orfila, O., G. Saint Pierre, M. Messias, J. Abecassis, P.
Mejuto, and P. Lopez. Development of an Ecodriving
Assistance Application for Nomadic Devices Performing

Wang et al

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

Real-Time and Post-Trip Coaching for Road Vehicles.
Proc., TRA2014-Transport Research Arena, France, April
2014.
Bilgram, A., E. Ernstsen, P. Greve, H. Lahrmann, K. G.
Larsen, M. Muñiz, P. Taankvist, and T. Pedersen. Online
and Proactive Vehicle Rerouting with Uppaal Stratego.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2021. 2675: 13–22.
Liu, S., W. T. Zhang, X. J. Wu, S. Feng, X. Pei, and D. Y.
Yao. A Simulation System and Speed Guidance Algorithms for Intersection Traffic Control Using Connected
Vehicle Technology. Tsinghua Science and Technology,
Vol. 24, No. 2, 2018, pp. 160–170.
Li, H. R., D. F. Chu, D. C. Liang, and T. Q. Zhou. ClosedLoop Feedback Speed Guidance Method Considering
Driving Style. Journal of Transportation Systems Engineering and Information Technology, Vol. 21, No. 3, 2021, p. 94.
Xu, L. P., and M. J. Deng. A Speed Guidance Method at
Signalized Intersections Based on Vehicle Infrastructure
Cooperation. Traffic Information and Safety, Vol. 39, No.
2, 2021, pp. 78–86.
Sun, Q., L. Zhang, H. Yu, W. J. Zhang, Y. Mei, and H.
Xiong. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Dynamic
Autonomous Vehicle Navigation at Intelligent Intersections.
Proc., 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Long Beach, CA, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, 2023, pp. 4852–4861.
Ding, F., Y. Zhao, H. Tan, Z. Liu, and Z. Pu. A Fundamental-Diagram-Informed Spatial Partitioning Method for
Heterogeneous Traffic Networks. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, Vol. 12, No. 9, 2024, pp. 12193–12205.

583
46. Chen, C. C., H. Wei, N. Xu, G. J. Zheng, M. Yang, Y. H.
Xiong, K. Xu, and Z. H. Li. Toward a Thousand Lights:
Decentralized Deep Reinforcement Learning for LargeScale Traffic Signal Control. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 34, No. 4, 2020,
pp. 3414–3421.
47. Wei, H., C. C. Chen, G. J. Zheng, K. Wu, V. Gayah, K.
Xu, and Z. H. Li. PressLight: Learning Max Pressure Control to Coordinate Traffic Signals in Arterial Network.
Proc., 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, Anchorage, AK,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 2019,
pp. 1290–1298.
48. Mnih, V., K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. Playing Atari with
Deep Reinforcement Learning. Computer Science, Vol. 21,
2013, pp. 351–362.
49. Hasselt, H. V., A. Guez, and D. Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-Learning. Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol, 30, No. 1,
2016, pp. 2094–2100.
50. Wang, Z., T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. de Freitas. Dueling Network Architectures for
Deep Reinforcement Learning. International Conference on
Machine Learning, PMLR, Vol. 48, 2016, pp. 1995–2003.
51. Mei, H., X. L. Lei, L. C. Da, B. Shi, and H. Wei. Libsignal:
An Open Library for Traffic Signal Control. Machine
Learning, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2024, pp. 5235–5271.
52. Roess, R. P., E. S. Prassas, and W. R. McShane. Traffic
Engineering. Pearson/Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, 2011.

