3730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Distributed Learning for Vehicle Routing Decision
in Software Defined Internet of Vehicles
Kai Lin , Senior Member, IEEE, Chensi Li , Yihui Li, Claudio Savaglio , Member, IEEE,
and Giancarlo Fortino , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— With the increasing number of vehicles, the traffic
congestion is becoming more and more serious. In order to
alleviate such a problem, this article considers transmission
and inference delay of cloud centralized computing in the
software defined Internet of Vehicles (SDIoV), and builds a new
SDIoV architecture based on edge intelligence, for supporting
real-time vehicle routing decision through distributed multi-agent
reinforcement learning model. Then, a software defined device
collaboration optimization method is designed to improve the
efficiency of distributed training. Combined with multi-agent
reinforcement learning, a distributed-learning-based vehicle routing decision algorithm (DLRD) is proposed to adaptively adjust
vehicle routing online. The performed simulations show that
the DLRD can successfully realize real-time routing decision for
vehicles and alleviate traffic congestion with the dynamic changes
of the road environment.
Index Terms— Distributed deep learning, edge intelligence,
vehicle routing decision, software defined Internet of Vehicles.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the development of the social economy,
the increasing number of vehicles has led to an urgent
need for the innovative solutions provided by the Internet
of Vehicles (IoV). Software-defined network (SDN) is an
innovative network architecture that separates the data forwarding plane and the network control plane, so that the
centralized network controller can flexibly control the basic
network facilities and network traffic. The advantages of SDN
are introduced into IoV to form a software-defined Internet
of Vehicles (SDIoV), which can fully schedule different IoV
resources to comprehensively improve the performance of
Manuscript received June 24, 2020; revised August 24, 2020; accepted
September 8, 2020. Date of publication September 28, 2020; date of current
version June 2, 2021. This work was supported in part by the Liaoning
Province Higher Education Innovative Talent Support Program, in part
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant DUT19JC22 and Grant DUT18RC(3)069, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U1908214, in part by the Italian
MIUR, PRIN 2017 Project Fluidware under Grant CUP H24I17000070001,
and in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
under Grant 2020YFB170458 and Grant 2018YFB1600600. The Associate
Editor for this article was Z. Lv. (Corresponding author: Kai Lin.)
Kai Lin, Chensi Li, and Yihui Li are with the School of Computer
Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024,
China (e-mail: link@dlut.edu.cn; lichensi@mail.dlut.edu.cn; 928982000@
mail.dlut.edu.cn).
Claudio Savaglio and Giancarlo Fortino are with the Department of
Informatics, Modeling, Electronics, and Systems (DIMES), University
of Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy (e-mail: g.fortino@unical.it; csavaglio@
dimes.unical.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2020.3023958

traditional IoV. As an important part of smart city, SDIoV
is facing the challenge of vehicle congestion, facing the challenging problem of traffic congestion: this issue is hindering
the development of modern society, seriously impacting on
traffic efficiency, people quality of life, and road accidents [1].
Fortunately, the advent of intelligent edge computing has
further promoted the development of SDIoV, empowering the
vehicle routing decision and thus the safety and efficiency of
transportation [2], [3].
Vehicle routing decision is the core problem that IoV needs
to solve. A better routing decision solution can not only
improve the traffic efficiency, but also make the driving environment of the vehicle safer. For example, Fu and Yin [4] proposed a hybrid routing decision algorithm based on simulated
annealing algorithm and particle swarm optimization, which
has a good global optimization ability and improves the safety
of vehicles. Different from the above method, edge intelligent
computing adopts distributed machine learning and combines
historical and real-time traffic environment information to
rationally plan vehicle travel paths and positively impact on
traffic congestion and efficiency [5].
In order to achieve vehicle routing decision for SDIoV, traditional SDIoV mainly completes the processing and analysis
of massive data in cloud servers, especially the training of
machine learning models, which requires a large amount of
raw data to be transmitted from vehicles to the cloud [6].
Abdelrahman et al. [7] proposed a novel cloud-based route
planner that utilizes drivers’ individualized risk profiles in suggesting routing options based on drivers’ personal skillfulness
levels. Adiththan et al. [8] proposed an adaptive offloading
technique for control computations into the cloud for vehicle
routing decision. Although the above methods exploit artificial
intelligence technology to improve routing decision, the aggregation process of massive data to the cloud will consume a
lot of networking, computation and storage resources. At the
same time, artificial intelligence models running on the cloud
are prone to form inference delays, which prevent vehicles to
promptly receive real-time routing decision. Moreover, with
the increasing number of connected vehicle, cloud centralized
processing is also facing problems of network congestion and
task waiting delays caused by data deluge [9].
This article uses edge intelligent computing to replace
the centralized processing of the cloud. We design a SDIoV
architecture that supports multi-agent learning [10] to
implement edge intelligence decisions and control network

1558-0016 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

data deluge, which is also in line with the inevitable trend
of SDIoV development [11]. For making full use of edge
resources and reducing inference delay, the asynchronous
parallel multi-agent deep learning is adopted to design the
routing decision algorithm [12].
1) An edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture, which
treats vehicles and roadside units (RSUs) as terminals
and edge devices, respectively, to avoid the reasoning
delay problem in routing decision due to cloud centralized processing and to mitigate network pressure
caused by data deluge. Moreover, it supports distributed
multi-agent reinforcement learning model for routing
decision.
2) A software defined device collaboration optimization
method to more efficiently and distributedly execute
routing decision tasks under an edge intelligent
architecture. It calculates the resource cost overhead
according to the task requirements and combines the
long-short-term memory neural network (LSTM) to
predict the resources cost of routing decision task,
which fully considers the sharing and mutual exclusion
of the resource requirements to optimize the task set
and interaction mode.
3) A distributed-learning-based vehicle routing decision
algorithm (DLRD). The edge-side devices cooperate
in an asynchronous and parallel manner to solve the
routing decision of the autonomous vehicles based
on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning to obtain
real-time routing decisions.
4) An extensive set of simulations to evaluate the proposed
algorithm by comparing with other three algorithms.
The results demonstrate that DLRD can achieve high
performance for reducing traffic congestion to improve
the efficiency of transportation.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we review the related works. The edge intelligence based
SDIoV architecture and multi-agent reinforcement learning
based routing decision model are presented in Section III.
In Section IV, the device interaction optimization method is
introduced. In Section V, we describe algorithm DLRD, while
the experiment results and analysis are presented in Section VI.
Final considerations and future work conclude the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
We review recent literature and related works in three
different perspectives that are closely related to our work:
A) vehicle routing decision, B) intelligent edge computing,
and C) distributed deep learning.
A. Vehicle Routing Decision
As an important part of SDIoV, vehicle routing decision focuses on optimizing route selection for vehicles to
improve overall traffic performance. Nha et al. [13] used
the algorithm Dijkstra for optimal vehicle routing decision,
and updated the plan based on real time traffic conditions.
Pothan et al. [14] adopted state lattice strategy for vehicle
routing decision, where a set of paths containing all the

3731

geometry, kinematics, and constraints of vehicles are preset,
and a rotation matrix is used in this method to describe
novelty. Vagner [15] proposed an intelligent route planner
system which could avoid the traffic jams of the city in a more
easy way. Zhao et al. [16] introduced content-data-friendly
information-center networking architecture into the internet
of vehicles, and achieved efficient routing decision for automatic vehicles through the big data acquisition and analysis.
Duan et al. [17] proposed the route search algorithm including establishment of environmental models and visualization
of digital map for implementing the process of intelligent
vehicle routing decision. Rasekhipour et al. [18] proposed a
model predictive route-planning controller which is capable
of treating different obstacles and road structures distinctly
while planning the optimal route utilizing vehicle dynamics.
However, the above routing decision methods are based on
the interests of individual vehicle, without meditating the
impact of the vehicle’s behavior on the traffic environment.
Differently, our proposal focuses on planning the appropriate
route for the vehicle with consideration of the overall traffic
environment.
B. Intelligent Edge Computing
Intelligent edge computing [11], [19] transfers networking,
computation and storage resource and services to the network
edge. It greatly decreases the data transmission from massive
terminals to the cloud for source data processing, analysis and
storage, thereby reducing network load [20], [21]. With the
development of intelligent edge computing, many researchers
apply it in the field of IoV. Zhang and Letaief [22] outlined
the latest developments in edge intelligence for IoV, introduced
key design issues, methods and hardware platforms, and typical use cases for intelligent vehicles, including edge-assisted
perception, mapping and positioning. Xu et al. [23] proposed a computational offload method that uses vehicle-to-all
communication (V2X) technology for data transmission in
edge computing, combined with related algorithms to generate a balanced offload strategy and find the best on the
premise of confirming the calculated route uninstall strategy.
Garg et al. [24] proposed a data-driven transportation optimization model to complete intelligent vehicles Cyber threat
detection, which uses unmanned aerial vehicles as intermediate
aerial nodes between vehicles and edge nodes to facilitate the
transmission of data from vehicles to the edge for real-time
analysis. Luo et al. [25] proposed a software-defined collaborative data sharing architecture based on edge computing
in 5G Internet of Vehicles, and verified the superiority and
scalability of the proposed architecture through simulation
experiments. Qi et al. [26] proposed a knowledge driven
service offloading decision framework for IoV which supports
the pre-training at the powerful edge computing node and continually online learning when the vehicular service is executed.
Moubayed et al. [27] used multiple access/mobile edge computing (MEC) by placing V2X services at edge nodes to satisfy
delay/latency requirements of V2X. In this article, intelligent
edge computing is further explored to implement distributed
deep learning and asynchronous parallel decision-making.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3732

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture.

C. Distributed Deep Learning

A. Edge Intelligence Based SDIoV Architecture

The growth of application services has brought a large
number of pending data, the learning and processing of these
data has complicated the training of deep learning models [28].
Distributed training using multiple devices has become an
essential choice. Zhu et al. [29] proposed a scalable multiagent
learning algorithm in an edge-assisted distributed routing
framework to efficiently find the Nash equilibria, enables
virtual agents representing vehicles to interact with others
to make real-time routing decisions. Mynuddin and Gao [30]
proposed a novel distributed predictive cruise control (PCC)
algorithm based on reinforcement learning, which can reduces
the travel time and fuel consumption rate of vehicles.
Ju et al. [31] proposed a distributed Kalman filter and a
modified generalized likelihood ratio algorithm to detect and
estimate the deception attacks of IoV sensors on vehicles.
Tian et al. [32] proposed a web attack detection system
which takes advantage of analyzing URLs based on distributed
deep learning, and proved that the system is competitive
in detecting Web attacks. Saputra et al. [33] proposed a
novel framework based on distributed deep learning, which
allows mobile edge nodes on the network to cooperate and
exchange information for reducing errors in content demand
predictions without revealing mobile users private information.
Langer et al. [34] proposed a method for distributed training of
deep learning models on spark, that is specifically designed to
run in low-budget environments. In this article, the distributed
multi-agent reinforcement learning model is designed and
deployed to achieve vehicle routing decision.

A representation of edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture is reported in Fig. 1. The architecture is built for a general
traffic environment, which is mainly composed of vehicles,
RSUs and cloud servers, denoted by set V = {v 1 , v 2 , . . . , v n },
R = {r1 , r2 , . . . r g } and C = {c1 , c2 , . . . cw } respectively.
Vehicles and RSUs jointly participate in learning tasks for
routing decision as edge-side devices.Vehicles act as terminal
devices to initiate learning requests for routing decision and
participate in learning tasks. RSUs work as edge servers to
provide a quick response service for vehicles, and at least one
RSU is deployed stationary on each road segment. Vehicleto-Vehicle (V2V) and Vehcile-to-RSU (V2R) communication are used for data transmission between terminals and
between terminals and edge servers, respectively. Vehicles
and RSUs communicate with the cloud through long-distance
wireless communication technologies such as 5G. This article
assumes that all vehicles, RSU and cloud servers have data
processing functions, which together provide intelligent services for vehicle-initiated routing decision tasks. The terminaledge-cloud device set can be expressed as I = {V, R, C} =
{u 1 , u 2 , . . . u m }.
The real-time position of vehicles can be obtained by
GPS or other localization technologies, and shared in SIoV
through RSUs and the cloud. The position of vehicles can
change with time, while the position of RSUs and cloud
servers are guaranteed to remain unchanged. Since the height
difference between vehicles, RSUs and cloud servers is usually
negligible, the distance between them is calculated from the
horizontal Euclidean distance based on longitude and latitude:

III. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE AND
P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, the edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture is designed, which implements routing decision decisions
by supporting distributed multi-agent reinforcement learning.

d(u p , u q ) =



(x p − x q )2 + (y p − yq )2

(1)

where x p , y p and x q , yq represent the latitude and longitude
of device u p and u q .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

Fig. 2.

3733

State update of routing decision by multi-agent reinforcement learning.

The architecture separates data and control by combining
with SDN, which is deployed on cloud servers in the form
of software as control components for facilitating global logic
control and fast data forwarding. In particular, it is responsible
for organizing device collaboration during training in this
article.
B. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Routing Decision
As a kind of distributed deep learning, the multi-agent
reinforcement learning takes full advantage of its parallel
training, and shares one system environment to all agents for
collaborative training. In the multi-agent interaction process,
decisions from different agents influence each other to collaboratively form better decision results. In this article, the distributed multi-agent reinforcement learning method is utilized to
make decisions for routing decision tasks initiated by vehicles.
The decision-making process focuses on the actual traffic
conditions, and the purpose of alleviating traffic congestion
is achieved by adjusting the vehicle’s route selection. The
multi-agent reinforcement learning model for routing decision
is defined as follows:
, S, {A p } , f, {R p } 
V
p∈ V
p∈ V

(2)

 = {ṽ 1 , ṽ 2 , . . . , ṽ h } represents the set of vehicles that
where V
initial planning request at a certain moment, i.e. h multi-agent
participating in reinforcement learning. S represents the state
set, which is specifically represented by driving routes of
vehicles, sk ∈ S represents the state of the agents at step k.
{A p } p∈V represents the action space of multi-agent. Assuming
that the maximum number of intersections in the environment
is Na , the direction that the vehicle v p can choose is A p =
{a 1p , a 2p , . . . , a pNa }. f : S × A × S −→ [0, 1] is the state
transition probability of the agent, and R p : S × A × S −→ R
represents the reward function.
Fig. 2 shows the state update of routing decision taking
two agents as an example, each disjoint line segment in the
figure represents a road segment. The starting and ending
points of route that two agents need to plan are 
Sq and E q ,
respectively. The red line and the green line represent the
driving routes of two vehicles, which will change according
to the actions selected by vehicles. Before reaching the ending
point, vehicles can change their driving direction at any time
to choose a different route.
The setting of the overall-reward function is related to
the traffic flow of each road state, which affects the actions
chosen by multi-agent. Assuming that the distribution density

of vehicles on the road has not changed in a short time,
this is defined as the time required for an iterative training,
and each adjustment of the routing decision will naturally
cause the distribution density of vehicles to change. In order
to alleviate traffic congestion, this article uses the difference
between traffic conditions of state sk and sk+1 , i.e. before and
after route adjustment to form a overall-reward function:
Ri (sk ) =

y
Nr
Nr
y


x k+1
xk
−
ωy l y
ωy l y
y=1

(3)

y=1

y

where Nr represents the number of road segments, x k is the
number of vehicles on the road segment y in the state sk ,
ω y represents the average width of the road segment y, l y
x

y

represents the length of the road segment y, ω ykl y represents
the distribution density of vehicles that can reflecting traffic
congestion, a larger value means more serious traffic congestion. Vehicles get rewarded by avoiding congested paths.
In order to realize dynamic and real-time routing decision,
it is necessary to perform the task of reinforcement learning
through device cooperation based on intelligent edge
computing. In this article, vehicle routing decision with the
same starting point and ending point is regarded as the same
multi-agent reinforcement learning task, and the vehicles
that initiated the planning constitute the agent set of the
task. Define the set of tasks that need to be learned as
M = {m 1 , m 2 , . . . , m d }. Considering the mobility of vehicles
and the communication distance limitations of V2V and
V2R, the cooperative devices that perform learning tasks are
neither fixed nor easily determined. In each time period t,
the following judgment matrix of whether the device can
participate in the collaboration is defined as:
W (t) = [w pq (t)]m×m

(4)

where w pq (t) = ρ pq × (D pq − d pq (t)) represents whether
devices u p and u q can cooperate without considering resource
constraints during time period t, named as collaborative feasibility. D pq represents the maximum distance that can be communicated between devices, the specific value is determined
by the devices’ types. d pq (t) is the maximum distance between
devices u p and u q during time period t. ρ pq is the correlation
between devices to measure the possibility of potential stable
cooperation of devices which is calculated as follows:
ρ pq = ψ pq × ξ pq
2n

(5)

pq
if both devices are vehicles, and n pq
where ψ pq = n p +n
q
counts the number of road segments where vehicles v p and v q

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

traveled together, n p and n q respectively represent the number
of road segments 
that vehicles v p and v q traveled. Otherwise,
d

ξi

ψ pq = 1. ξ pq = i=1d pq represents the feasibility of devices
i is
u p and u q cooperating to execute the same task and ξ pq
defined as follows:
⎧
i
i
i
⎪
⎨ (Y p + Yq ) × (1 − y pq )
,
p = q
i
(6)
ξ pq =
Yi
⎪
⎩ Y i /Y ,
else
i
p
where Yqi and Yqi respectively represent the data that devices
v p and v q can provide to participate in performing task m i ,
respectively. Yi is the data required by task m i . y ipq represents
the proportion of duplicate data related to task m i in devices
v p and v q . When w pq (t) > 0, devices u p and u q can cooperate
to perform tasks, and the larger value means more stable
cooperation. Conversely, these two devices cannot collaborate.
IV. S OFTWARE D EFINED D EVICE C OLLABORATION
O PTIMIZATION M ETHOD
Routing decision decisions consume corresponding computing, storage, and communication resources. Since most
terminals have limited computing and storage capabilities,
it is difficult to perform learning tasks independently without
the assistance of other devices. Meanwhile, the cooperative
reinforcement learning of multi-agent requires the sharing of
information between devices to achieve the overall optimization goal. Therefore, it is necessary to effectively organize
the devices that participates in the execution of routing decision tasks, and whether these devices can obtain the various
resources required to perform the tasks in time is critical to
real-time decision performance. By considering the resource
overhead of tasks under the edge intelligence architecture,
a software defined device collaborative organization optimization method is designed which focuses on device set selection
and interaction mode adoption for completing routing decision
based on reinforcement learning. In this method, the initial set
of collaborative devices and the interaction modes used are
formed according to the resource overhead of task execution,
and the long-short-term memory neural network is used to
predict the future resource overhead of the task, and further
optimization is used to reduce the decision delay of routing
decision.
A. Resource Overhead Measurement for Routing Decision
Tasks
For a certain learning task m i , the set of all interaction modes completing by collaborate of terminal-edge-cloud
devices (may not include these three types of devices at
the same time) is expressed as set ξi , the set of terminaledge-cloud devices set involved in interaction mode ωiε ∈ ξi
is Iiε = {u ε1 , u ε2 , . . . u lε }.
Each routing decision task can be performed by different
sets of devices through different interaction modes, which
results in different resource requirements and makes the
online resource overhead measurement problem complicated.
In order to adapt to this situation, no matter what device set

and interaction mode is used for the routing decision task,
the corresponding resource overhead needs to be calculated
in time. In general, the computing overhead of devices to
perform a task is mainly reflected in their CPU usage, so it is
expressed in terms of these CPUs’ computing power and usage
rate. The storage overhead of task is expressed by the storage
occupation of the corresponding devices, and the communication overhead is calculated by the channel bandwidth between
the devices occupied by the task. To simplify the description,
this article assumes that the channel bandwidth required for
device communication remains unchanged when performing
routing decision learning tasks. The calculation of the resource
overhead also needs to consider the changes in resource
requirements caused by different device sets and interaction
modes under multi-task parallelism. The calculation process is
divided into two steps: Single routing decision task overhead
calculation and Overall routing decision overhead calculation.
1) Single Vehicle Routing Decision Task Overhead Calculation: Due to the different measurement pattern involved in
computing, storage, and communication overheads, the overhead of vehicle routing decision task m i is defined as a three
tuple ϕi = (ri , gi , pi ), where ri , gi and pi represent the
computing, storage, and communication overhead required for
task execution, respectively. When calculating the overhead
of task m i in interactive mode ωiε , the CPU usage and
storage occupation of the task on each device, as well as the
communication requirements between devices can be obtained.
Define the required CPU usage rate and storage occupation
p
p
of device u εp are ςi and τi , the communication bandwidth
pq
occupied between device u εp and u εq is Bi under interaction
ε
mode ωi . The resource overhead of task m i is:
l
p
l
l
l 


p=1 ςi × W p
p
pq
ϕi = (ri , gi , pi ) = ( l
,
τi ,
Bi )
W
p
p=1
p=1
p=1 q=1
(7)
where W p represents the cpu capability of the device u εp ,
which is calculated according to the cpu core number, main
frequency and transistor number. Routing decision tasks must
ensure the real-time nature of decision-making, and the overhead of resources exceeding the burden of the device set will
result in the inability to perform the task within the specified
time. In this case, device sets and interaction modes need to
be adjusted.
2) Overall Vehicle Routing Decision Overhead Calculation:
The change of interaction mode has an independent impact on
each kind of resource overhead, and the degree of impact is
restricted by objective factors such as data distribution and
network environment. When measuring the overall overhead
of routing decision in SDIoV, the parallel execution of multiple
tasks creates resource sharing (including storage data) and
competition conflicts between devices. The combined effect of
multi-dimensional resource sharing and mutual exclusion leads
to the calculation of the overall overhead cannot be equal to the
sum of individual tasks. Therefore, this article draws sharing
effect between tasks into the solution of calculating the overall
resource overhead. The overall overhead of routing decision
tasks is also defined as a three tuple ϕ M = (r M , g M , p M ),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

where r M , g M and p M represent the computing, storage, and
communication overhead required for execution of all tasks.
The resource sharing between the tasks due to mutual influence
is expressed by a matrix as follows:
H = [ϕa , Na ] y×2

(8)

where a represents resources that have been jointly used by
parallel execution of multiple tasks, and there are y in total,
ϕa = (ra , ga , pa ) stands for the overhead of resource a,
and Na indicates the number of tasks using resource a. The
overhead required for resources shared by multiple tasks only
needs to be calculated once, so the overall overhead for routing
decision in SDIoV is calculated as follows:
ϕM =

d

i=1

ϕi −

y


ϕa × (Na − 1)

(9)

a=1

B. Initialing Device Set and Interaction Mode
In the initial division of collaborative devices for a task,
priority is given to the interest of the vehicles that initiated the
task. The multi-agent routing decision task can be regarded
as a collaboration of single-agent tasks, while independent
single-agent training is used to make decisions when target vehicles have different starting or ending points. The
device set must contains the vehicles that initiate the routing
decision request. If these vehicles have sufficient computing
and storage capacity, no additional devices are needed to
perform the distributed learning process, and communication
with other devices is limited to information sharing during
reinforcement learning. Otherwise, continuously selecting idle
RSUs or vehicles with the greatest collaborative feasibility
w pq (t) by matrix W (t), and add them into the collaborative
device set to jointly perform the routing decision task through
information exchange. Although adding participating devices
provide more information and resources for task execution,
it is also reduces the efficiency of task execution caused
by increasing the complexity of the collaboration process.
Therefore, when the storage and computing capacity meet
tasks, adding collaboration devices is stopped.
The initial selection of the task cooperation equipment set is
based on a single task without considering it from the overall
perspective of SDIoV. In fact, a device may perform multiple
tasks at the same time. When the device’s own capacity is
not enough to perform multiple tasks at the same time, problems such as resource waiting and repeated calculation will
occur. It is necessary to adaptively adjust the device sets and
interaction modes that perform tasks, and improve resource
utilization and reduce task waiting time through resource
sharing. In order to share partially overlapping resources in
the execution of multiple routing decision tasks, the formation
of a collaborative device set needs to consider the correlation
between tasks. Since the routing decision task is initiated by
the vehicles, the relevance of tasks is related to the social
correlation of the vehicles, and is also related to the planning
route. By comprehensively considering the correlation between
j that initiate tasks m i and m j ,
i and V
the vehicle sets V

3735

the correlation between the tasks and is calculated as follows:
2Ni j
1
(10)
ϑi j = ρi j
Ni + N j m W k + 1
k=1 i j
i and V
j ,
where ρi j is the correlation between vehicle sets V
which is equal to the average social correlation between
vehicles. Ni and N j represent the number of states input for
reinforcement learning training of tasks m i and m j , while Ni j
is the number of coincident input states of tasks m i and m j .


w
(t)
j wkb (t)
ka

u b ∈V
u
∈
V
a
i
Wikj = |
−
|
(11)
i
j
N
N
where u a and u b respectively belong to different sets of
i and N
j represent
vehicles that initiated tasks m i and m j . N
the number of vehicles that initiated tasks m i and m j . wka (t) is
obtained according to equation 4,indicating the collaborative
feasibility of device u k and u a . u a ∈Vi wka (t) uses summation to measure the overall collaborative feasibility between
device u k and vehicles which initiate task m i . wkb (t) and

k
j wkb (t) are defined in the same way. Wi j represents
u b ∈V
the difference of average collaborative feasibility between
vehicles which initiate task m i and m j who cooperate with
device u k . The smaller the value of Wikj W means the greater
the feasibility of vehicles initiating the task m i or m j to
perform the task in cooperation with the same device u k .

k
In other words, m
k=1 Wi j reflects the difference between these
two device sets participating in the collaborative execution of
task m i and m j .
After obtaining the correlation between tasks, the adjustments is made to the tasks’ device sets and interaction modes,
so that the similar data processing part of the tasks with higher
correlation is performed in the same device, and the resource
sharing between the tasks is realized. That is, for tasks whose
task relevance is great, analyze the problems that the task
needs to process on each device, move similar processing to
the device side with a smaller amount of tasks, and share
device resources to perform the task. Through preliminary
division and adjustment, the task device set and interactive
mode is formed.
C. Device Set and Interaction Mode Optimization
1) Resource Overhead Prediction for Routing Decision
Task: The alternation of execution way and target of routing
decision task leads to dynamic changes in resource requirements. If the trend can be predicted, the required resources
can be scheduled in advance to ensure the completion of the
task [35]. LSTM as a time-loop neural network is suitable for
predicting time-related events. Its input contains useful output
results of the previous time period. Each repeated training will
add a new input, and finally the result of the next time period
to be predicted is output through the previous comprehensive
training. To this end, this article uses LSTM to predict resource
overhead based on changes in execution interaction mode of
task.
Fig. 3 shows the single task resource prediction process. The
input function contains historical information about whether

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

the task priority needs to be adjusted adaptively. The trend
of adjustment is to increase the priority of tasks with higher
initial priority and longer waiting time. In order to reduce the
training and reasoning delay of task execution for real-time
decision-making, dynamic programming for solving Markov
decision is adopted to optimize device collaboration.
S  , As , R(s, a), P

Fig. 3.

Single task resource prediction process.

the task is executed and what interaction mode is used:
dtx (m i ) = [δi (tx ),

ε
ε
i (t x ), Ii (t x )]

(12)

where δi (tx ) is a coefficient factor which judges whether
task m i is executed, iε (tx ) and Iiε (tx ) respectively represent
the set of devices that execute the task in time period tx and
the corresponding interaction mode. As for task m i , the task
execution matrix dt t+1 (m i ) in the future time period t t +1 can
be obtained by inputting the task execution matrix dtx (m i ) of
the known time periods t0 to t t . First, whether the task is
executed is judged in the time period dt t+1 (m i ) according
to the obtained coefficient factor δi (t t +1 ). If it is executed,
the resource overhead of the task in the future time period
t t +1 is calculated by Equation 6. Furthermore, the obtained
dt t+1 (m i ) can be used as a known condition to predict the
task execution status of the time period t t +2 , and then the
process is repeated continuously to obtain long-term resource
overhead prediction.
2) Device Collaborative Organization Optimization: The
parallel multi-agent routing decision task based on edge intelligent computing needs to fully consider the sharing and mutual
exclusion of the resource requirements of execution tasks.
Therefore, it is necessary to design a device collaborative organization optimization method that can be used in environments
with limited network resources.
|M|×|I |
is used to denote the resource allocation matrix at
Xt
t
t
t
t
time period t, where the value x ip
is a three tuple (rip
, gip
, pip
)
represents the computing, storage and communication overhead caused by device u p performing task m i . According
to the above overhead prediction and preliminary adjustment
of the device set, an initialized matrix X t can be obtained.
In order to improve the execution performance of all routing
decision tasks in SDIoV, it is necessary to avoid mutually
exclusive tasks from being executed by the same device and
deploy different tasks with shared data on same devices when
multiple tasks are executed in parallel. In addition, considering
that under the condition of limited resources, some tasks can
not be completed within the time limit, the dynamic task
prioritization is introduced for task deployment.
Let the dynamic priority of task m i be ζit =
f ζ (ζi0 , T (x it , wit , cit )), where ζi0 represents the initial priority
of task. T (x it , wit , cit ) represents the total waiting time of task
form the task generated to time period t, including resource
allocation mode x it , resources waiting time wit and training
time cit . In the process of device collaborative optimization,

(13)

The state space S  is the set of tasks’ volume in different
time period t which need to be completed. In each state,
the selectable resource allocation way set As is the possible
set of all X t , P is the state transition probability, and the
reward R(s, a) depends on the state and decision of each step.
In this article, P is set to 1, and T is defined as the maximum
total execution time, then the iteration number of each Markov
decision process is not more than |tT| . Define T̃ as the sum of
task execution and waiting time at a certain state, and the
priority sum of all completed tasks at this state is ζt . The
reward is defined as:
R(s, a) = −(T̃ +

1
)
ζt

(14)

The set of all strategies defined in the system forms a
strategy space . The goal of dynamic programming is to
find the strategy π ∗ with the highest benefit:
max E{

T
/|t |

γ R(s, a)}

(15)

t =0

where γ is the discount factor. In order to find the optimal
solution, we introduce the Bellman equation [36] and define
the value function of state s  as κ π (s), then the expectation
that strategy π can obtain is:
κ π (s) = E π {

T
/|t |

γ Rk+t +1 |s = sk }

(16)

t =0
∗

The strategy π ∗ needs to be found to make κ π (s) =
maxκ π (s). According to the Bellman equation, and writing
the value function of all states a vector κ, we can get:
κ(s) = max{R(s, a) +
a∈ As

R(s, a) 
κ(z)}
γ + R(s, a)


(17)

z∈S

The reward function is normalized as follows:
R̃(s, a) = R(s, a)

R(s, a) + γ
η+γ

(18)

where η is the normalized parameter, and the Bellman equation
is deformed as follows:
κ̃(s) = max{ R̃(s, a) +
a∈ As

R̃(s, a)



γ + R̃(s, a)

z∈S 

κ̃(z)}

(19)

Finally, the value iteration method is used to continuously
increase the reward until the reward value cannot be increased,
and the obtained is the final resource allocation matrix, i.e. the
device cooperation mode.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

V. D ISTRIBUTED -L EARNING -BASED V EHICLE
ROUTING D ECISION A LGORITHM
A. Distributed Deep Q Learning Based Routing Decision
In this article, the goal of vehicle routing decision is
to improve traffic efficiency by reducing congestion, which
requires collaboration between vehicles. Each multi-agent
reinforcement learning task plans paths for vehicles with
the same start and end points, and the vehicles that initiate
the request form the agent set of the task. Vehicles with
computing, communication, and storage capabilities act as
terminals to perform distributed reinforcement training. Here,
distributed collaborative learning requires each vehicle v p to
maintain its own local Q value Q kp (sk , ak ) and strategy h p (sk )
through its own action decision.
The update of Q k (sk , ak ) at the k + 1 step is as follows:
k
k
k
k+1
k
k
Q k+1
p (sk , a p ) = max{Q i (sk , a p ), r p +γ max Q p (sk+1 , a p )}

(20)
where a kp and sk denote the selected action and the state
that represents routes updated by all vehicles that initiate
routing decisions in step k. γ is the discount factor. The
action selection of vehicle in each step will change its routing.
Besides, the travel time of vehicles is also considered to
=
evaluate the single-reward as one of factors. Defining r k+1
p
Ri (sk+1 ) + χ as the single-reward of vehicle v p in state sk+1 ,
k
k+1
represents the time feedback, T k is the
where χ = T −T
Tk
time vehicle v p needs to travel on the selected routing to the
ending point in step k, the shorter travel time means the greater
reward value. The wrong driving action chosen by vehicles is
lead to addition of driving time, which makes the single-reward
reduce caused by negative time feedback.
The strategy h p (sk ) is updated as follows:
⎧
k+1
⎪
a kp ,
max Q k+1
⎪
p (sk+1 , a p )
⎪
k+1
⎪
a
p
⎨
h k+1
(21)
= max Q kp (sk+1 , a k+1
p (sk ) =
p )
k+1
⎪
⎪
a
p
⎪
⎪
⎩ h k (s ), else
p k
which means that for the state sk , when the value Q increases,
the new action is selected to increase the reward, otherwise
the action selected at the state is unchanged.
All agents calculate independently and greedily obtain their
own optimal solution. Furthermore, we add collaboration
between agents for distributed multi-agent learning to find
the group optimal solution. In this article, agents make their
own decisions while considering each other’s influence, so that
multi-agents eventually form a consistent strategy.
In order to facilitate vehicle collaboration, course-based
learning method is combined to achieve collaborative distributed reinforcement learning [37]. In the process of machine
learning, the course-based learning method trains samples in
a certain order. Simple samples are trained first, and the next
sample is added for training when the current training process
tends to be stable. In this way, samples are added into training
from simple to complex until all samples are trained, which
can get a better local optimal solution and improve training
speed. In the multi-agent reinforcement learning in this article,

3737

due to the learning objectives of all agents are the same,
the learning of multi-agent can be divided into multiple parts.
The training of each agents part is a sub-learning process,
we start training from the agents with shorter planning route.
When the training reaches a certain level, we add the next part
of agents in training until all agents are joined.
The join time of next agents part needs to be determined
by the current learning progress of training, that is, only when
the current training results are relatively stable. φk is defined
to represent the learning situation of the system in state sk :
(22)
φk = Q k (sk , ak ) − Q k−1 (sk−1 , ak−1 )
h 
k
k

where Q k (sk , ak ) =
i=1 Q i (sk , ai ). h is the number of
agents currently joining the training. If φk is very small, i.e.
the rewards obtained by changing the action no longer increase
significantly, the next part of agents can join for training.
In SDIoV, if there are many vehicles that initiate the
routing decision task or the planned route is long, traditional
reinforcement learning method are difficult to obtain effective
results in time due to the excessive computational cost for
such problems. the state space of reinforcement learning is
very complex and huge. Therefore, this article uses a deep
Q-learning (DQN) algorithm that combines deep neural networks and reinforcement learning for online inference. The
 − gr eed y strategy is used to determine the next action taken
by the agent, the action that maximizes the Q value is selected
with the probability of 1−, or the action is selected randomly
with the probability of  [38].
In this article, the states are abstracted as a one-dimensional
vector input to the DQN, and the next action of multi-agent
is decided according to the network output Q(s, a; θ ), where
parameter θ represents the deep reinforcement learning network parameter. The loss function L(θ ) for DQN training of
one single-agent is as follows:
+ γ max Q p (sk+1 , a  ; θ p )
L(θ p ) = E sk ,a k ,r k+1 ,sk+1 [(r k+1
p
p

a

p

− Q p (sk , a kp ; θ p ))2 ]

(23)

The partial derivative of the loss function is utilized to
calculate the update gradient of parameter θ :
∇θ L(θ p ) =

∂ L(θ p )
∂θ p

= E sk ,a k ,r k+1 ,sk+1 [(r k+1
+ γ max Q p (sk+1 , a  ; θ p )
p
p

p

− Q p (sk , a kp ; θ p ))

a
∂ Q p (sk , a kp ; θ p )

∂θ p

]

(24)

The update of the parameter θ p is:
θ p = θ p − α∇θ L(θ p )

(25)

where α is the learning rate.
B. Distributed-Learning-Based Vehicle Routing Decision
Through the software defined device collaborative organization optimization method described above, the set of devices
that perform the routing decision task can be determined. For
any multi-agent learning routing decision task m i , the training

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

Algorithm 1 Distributed-Learning-Based Vehicle Routing
Decision Algorithm
Initialization: Initialize Q p (s, a) with random weight θ p
of all agents, the state s = s0 where all vehicles that
initiated the task at the starting point;
2: for k in (0, . . . , Ni ) do
 do
3: for v p in V
4:
Select a random action a kp with probability , otherwise
a kp = max Q p (sk , a p ; θ p );
1:

ap

Fig. 4. Training process of single-agent and multi-agent based on distributed
learning.

and calculation of the task can perform through the device set.
Assuming that the multi-agent task has h agents, then each task
can be divided into h single agent learning tasks. These agents
use V2V or V2R communication to realize the information
sharing between them, and then cooperate to maximize the
sum of their rewards for achieving the final goal.
As shown in Fig. 4(a), for training process of one
single-agent of task m i initiated by vehicle v p , the system
takes the state of single vehicle or multiple vehicles with
different starting points or ending points as input for training,
and independently outputs the most suitable planned route for
each vehicle. A set of collaborative devices I p (which may
include vehicles, RSUs, or cloud servers) provides resources
required for training, these devices performs distributed training in an asynchronous and parallel manner. Each device
participating in the learning performs the parameter training
in certain specific layers during the training, as well as the
communication transmission and update parameters between
the devices, and then feeds the final result back to the agent.
The process of multi-agent training is show in Fig. 4(b),
the system takes the state of multiple vehicles with the same
starting point and ending point as input training and outputs
the appropriate route planning for all vehicles, agent with
these vehicles constitute the multi-agent for the same task.
These agents share state information, but each agent trains
its own parameters independently. The device participates in
training is responsible for at least one single-agent training
belong to the task. After each step of training, agents share
the impact of their actions on routing to update the state. Then
their rewards are calculated according to the state. Finally,
the task is trained iteratively until the reward value no longer
increases significantly. The perform detail of DLRD is shown
in Algorithm 1.
The initial learning model and training parameters required
for vehicle routing decision can be obtained by training all
different route plans in advance, and updated through online
distributed collaborative learning during the real-time planning
process.
VI. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
This section evaluates the proposed DLRD algorithm by
using VISSIM. 100 road segments are set in the simulation.
The number of vehicles change from 200 to 2500, the routing
decision is performed for 70% of these vehicles. The main

5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

end for
Observe the system reward Ri (sk+1 ) and new state sk+1 ;
 do
for v p in V
Minimize the loss L(θ p ) according to equation 23 and
update θ p ;
end for
end for

Fig. 5.

Traffic light setting at cross-shaped intersections.

Fig. 6.

Network structure for training.

purpose of the experiment is to alleviate the further traffic
congestion caused by the random driving of 2500 vehicles by
planning the route of 2500 vehicles. Vehicle routing decision
with the same starting point and ending point is a multi-agent
reinforcement learning task. During the learning process,
the movement of the vehicle leads to real-time adjustment
of the routing decision requirements, and each agent learning
device set is obtained based on software defined device collaborative organization optimization method. Driving speed of the
vehicle is set between 35-60km/h. The parameter μ = N y /S y
is used to judge whether the road is congested, where N y
and Sy represent the number of vehicles on and the area of
road segment y. The road intersections are all cross-shaped
intersections. The traffic light setting include four phases is
shown in Fig. 5.
The network structure used by training for one of the agents
of multi-agent learning in routing decision is shown in Fig. 6.
The input is a one-dimensional state vector of length 100,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

Fig. 7.

The decision delay time of four algorithms.

representing the distribution of vehicles on 100 road segments.
The middle layer of the network include five fully connected
layers, and the number of neurons is 128, 256, 512, 256 and
128, respectively. Each fully connected layer is followed by an
activation function ReLU. The output is a vector of length Na ,
representing Na Q value results. γ and α are all set to 0.9.
The initial value of  in the  − gr eed y strategy is 0.5, and it
decreases by 0.01 for every 1000 training steps until it drops
to 0.1.
This article evaluates the proposed DLRD algorithm in
terms of decision delay time and congestion control capabilities. In the experiment, the DLRD is compared with reverse
Stackelberg approach algorithm (RSG) [39], stage learning
algorithm (SL) [29] and distributed cooperative routing algorithm (DCR) [40]. In RSG, the reverse Stackelberg game is
utilized to model vehicle routing, and the systematic optimal
vehicle routing is achieved according to the predicted traffic
conditions. The SL performs vehicle routing decision by
quantifying the bounded rationality of the driver as a parameter
for multi-agent learning in an edge-assisted distributed routing
framework. The DCR models cooperative vehicle routing
decision as a population game and then use evolutionary game
theory combined with edge computing to solve the problem.
Fig. 7 shows the decision delay time of four algorithms,
which is the average waiting time of the vehicle from initiating
the request to obtaining the decision result. It should be noted
that this online decision delay is based on previous training
results instead of a complete training process from scratch. The
comparison is done by changing the number of vehicles, while
the routing decision is performed for 70% of them. It can be
found that with the increase number of agents (vehicles that
initiate the task), although the training time of all algorithms
increases, the decision time of DLRD is significantly less
than others. Moreover, the growth rate of time caused by the
increase number of vehicles in DLRD is also the smallest.
In order to evaluate the control ability of traffic conditions
through different algorithms, traffic congestion and the average
waiting time are used as measurement standards. Assuming
that when μ > 0.6, the road is congested. The traffic congestion is tested by performing routing decision for 2500 vehicles,
while adding vehicles to the road at a flow of 40 vehicles/min.
In addition, a 2.5-hour simulation test is conducted. In the

3739

Fig. 8.

The number of congested road segments.

Fig. 9.

The average number of vehicles on the congested road segments.

Fig. 10.

The average awaiting time at intersection.

first hour, all test vehicles are on the road, and the peak of
congestion reaches around 1.5 hours. The number of congested
road segments is shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that the
DLRD algorithm has the least number of congested road
segments compared to the other two algorithms. In addition,
Fig. 9 shows the average number of vehicles on the congested
road segments of these algorithms, and DLRD still has the
smallest number of vehicles, which means that even on congested routes, DLRD can reduce the degree of congestion.
Fig. 10 shows the vehicles’ average waiting time at intersection with the number of vehicles change from 200 to 2500.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 6, JUNE 2021

It can be seen that DLRD has the least waiting time. This
means that the DLRD can effectively relieve traffic congestion.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This article studied the vehicle routing decision in SDIoV
to relieve traffic congestion, recently intensified by the rapid
growth of vehicles number. In detail, we first proposed
the edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture to alleviate
the pressure of cloud centralized computing and to reduce the
delay caused by transferring data to the remote cloud. First,
the edge intelligence based SDIoV architecture is proposed
to alleviate the pressure of cloud centralized computing and
reduce the delay caused by transferring data to the remote
cloud. Then the multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for
vehicle routing decision is introduced, which treats the vehicle
that initiates the routing decision as an agent and vehicles
requests with the same starting point and ending point constitute the multi-agent of the same task. Then, a software defined
collaboration optimization method is designed to speed up
the distributed training process. Finally, the DLRD algorithm
is designed with combination of edge based deep Q-learning
for real-time routing decision. The simulation results show
that the proposed DLRD has excellent performance in ease
traffic congestion and can effectively reduce the training
time. Future work will consider how to accelerate distributed
learning to get a faster vehicle planning decision response.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Thakur and R. Malekian, “Fog computing for detecting vehicular
congestion, an Internet of vehicles based approach: A review,” IEEE
Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 8–16, Summer 2019.
[2] M. Chen, Y. Tian, G. Fortino, J. Zhang, and I. Humar, “Cognitive
Internet of vehicles,” Comput. Commun., vol. 120, pp. 58–70, May 2018.
[3] K. Lin, J. Luo, L. Hu, M. S. Hossain, and A. Ghoneim, “Localization
based on social big data analysis in the vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1932–1940, Aug. 2017.
[4] J. Yin and W. Fu, “A hybrid path planning algorithm based on simulated
annealing particle swarm for the self-driving car,” in Proc. Int. Comput.,
Signals Syst. Conf. (ICOMSSC), Sep. 2018, pp. 696–700.
[5] M. Chen and Y. Hao, “Label-less learning for emotion cognition,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2430–2440,
Jul. 2020.
[6] K. Lin, C. Li, G. Fortino, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Vehicle route
selection based on game evolution in social Internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2423–2430, Aug. 2018.
[7] A. Abdelrahman, H. S. Hassanein, and N. Abu-Ali, “IRouteSafe: Personalized cloud-based route planning based on risk profiles of drivers,”
in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[8] A. Adiththan, S. Ramesh, and S. Samii, “Cloud-assisted control of
ground vehicles using adaptive computation offloading techniques,”
in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2018,
pp. 589–592.
[9] K. Lin, M. Chen, J. Deng, M. M. Hassan, and G. Fortino, “Enhanced
fingerprinting and trajectory prediction for IoT localization in smart
buildings,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1294–1307,
Jul. 2016.
[10] G. Fortino, W. Russo, C. Savaglio, W. Shen, and M. Zhou, “Agentoriented cooperative smart objects: From IoT system design to implementation,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 48, no. 11,
pp. 1939–1956, Nov. 2018.
[11] R. Casadei, G. Fortino, D. Pianini, W. Russo, C. Savaglio, and M. Viroli,
“Modelling and simulation of opportunistic IoT services with aggregate computing,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 91, pp. 252–262,
Feb. 2019.

[12] Y. Zhang, R. Wang, M. S. Hossain, M. F. Alhamid, and M. Guizani,
“Heterogeneous information network-based content caching in the
Internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 10,
pp. 10216–10226, Oct. 2019.
[13] V. T. N. Nha, S. Djahel, and J. Murphy, “A comparative study of
vehicles’ routing algorithms for route planning in smart cities,” in Proc.
1st Int. Workshop Veh. Traffic Manage. Smart Cities (VTM), Nov. 2012,
pp. 1–6.
[14] S. Pothan, J. L. Nandagopal, and G. Selvaraj, “Path planning using
state lattice for autonomous vehicle,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Technol.
Advancements Power Energy (TAP Energy), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[15] A. Vagner, “Intelligent route planning system for car drivers in a
city,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Cognit. Infocommun. (CogInfoCom),
Oct. 2015, pp. 551–555.
[16] C. Zhao, M. Dong, K. Ota, J. Li, and J. Wu, “Edge-mapreduce-based
intelligent information-centric IoV: Cognitive route planning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 50549–50560, 2019.
[17] J. Duan, H. Ge, and J. Yao, “Implementation of path planning method of
intelligent vehicle based on MapX,” in Proc. 26th Chin. Control Decis.
Conf. (CCDC), May 2014, pp. 4720–4724.
[18] Y. Rasekhipour, A. Khajepour, S.-K. Chen, and B. Litkouhi, “A potential
field-based model predictive path-planning controller for autonomous
road vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 18, no. 5,
pp. 1255–1267, May 2017.
[19] M. G. R. Alam, M. M. Hassan, M. Z. Uddin, A. Almogren, and
G. Fortino, “Autonomic computation offloading in mobile edge for
IoT applications,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 90, pp. 149–157,
Jan. 2019.
[20] M. Chen, Y. Miao, H. Gharavi, L. Hu, and I. Humar, “Intelligent traffic
adaptive resource allocation for edge computing-based 5G networks,”
IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 499–508,
Jun. 2020.
[21] Y. Zhang, X. Ma, J. Zhang, M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and
S. U. Amin, “Edge intelligence in the cognitive Internet of Things:
Improving sensitivity and interactivity,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 58–64, May 2019.
[22] J. Zhang and K. B. Letaief, “Mobile edge intelligence and computing
for the Internet of vehicles,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 246–261,
Feb. 2020.
[23] X. Xu, Y. Xue, X. Li, L. Qi, and S. Wan, “A computation offloading
method for edge computing with vehicle-to-everything,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 131068–131077, 2019.
[24] S. Garg, A. Singh, S. Batra, N. Kumar, and L. T. Yang, “UAVempowered edge computing environment for cyber-threat detection in
smart vehicles,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 42–51, May 2018.
[25] G. Luo et al., “Software defined cooperative data sharing in edge
computing assisted 5G-VANET,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early
access, Nov. 12, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2019.2953163.
[26] Q. Qi et al., “Knowledge-driven service offloading decision for vehicular
edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 4192–4203, May 2019.
[27] A. Moubayed, A. Shami, P. Heidari, A. Larabi, and R. Brunner,
“Edge-enabled V2X service placement for intelligent transportation
systems,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early access, Jan. 10, 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TMC.2020.2965929.
[28] M. Chen, X. Shi, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, and M. Guizani, “Deep features
learning for medical image analysis with convolutional autoencoder
neural network,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, early access, Jun. 20, 2017,
doi: 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2717439.
[29] B. Zhu, J. Li, Q. Yuan, J. Lu, and S. Yang, “An edge-assisted vehicle
routing method based on game-theoretic multiagent learning,” in Proc.
IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Dec. 2019,
pp. 462–469.
[30] M. Mynuddin and W. Gao, “Distributed predictive cruise control based
on reinforcement learning and validation on microscopic traffic simulation,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 270–277, May 2020.
[31] Z. Ju, H. Zhang, and Y. Tan, “Distributed deception attack detection in
platoon-based connected vehicle systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 4609–4620, May 2020.
[32] Z. Tian, C. Luo, J. Qiu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A distributed deep
learning system for Web attack detection on edge devices,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1963–1971, Mar. 2020.
[33] Y. M. Saputra, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, E. Dutkiewicz, D. Niyato,
and D. I. Kim, “Distributed deep learning at the edge: A novel proactive
and cooperative caching framework for mobile edge networks,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1220–1223, Aug. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIN et al.: DISTRIBUTED LEARNING FOR VEHICLE ROUTING DECISION IN SDIoV

[34] M. Langer, A. Hall, Z. He, and W. Rahayu, “MPCA SGD—A method
for distributed training of deep learning models on spark,” IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2540–2556, Nov. 2018.
[35] K. Lin, Y. Li, J. Deng, P. Pace, and G. Fortino, “Clustering-learningbased long-term predictive localization in 5G-envisioned Internet of
connected vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access,
Jun. 5, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2020.2997472.
[36] M. L. Puterman, “Markov decision processes: Discrete stochastic
dynamic programming,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 46, no. 6, p. 792, 1995.
[37] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston, “Curriculum
learning,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2009, pp. 41–48.
[38] Y. Li, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” 2017,
arXiv:1701.07274. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07274
[39] N. Groot, G. Zaccour, and B. D. Schutter, “Hierarchical game theory
for system-optimal control: Applications of reverse Stackelberg games
in regulating marketing channels and traffic routing,” IEEE Control Syst.
Mag., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 129–152, Apr. 2017.
[40] J. Lu, J. Li, Q. Yuan, and B. Chen, “A multi-vehicle cooperative routing
method based on evolutionary game theory,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC), Oct. 2019, pp. 987–994.

Kai Lin (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in communication engineering
from Northeastern University, China. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of
Technology. His research interests include wireless
communications, big data analysis, and the Internet
of Things (IoT). He is an Associate Editor of Recent
Advances in Communications and Networking Technology and editor of several journals.

Chensi Li received the B.S. degree in software engineering from Dalian Maritime University, China.
She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer application technology with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China. Her research interests
include social networks and vehicular networks.

3741

Yihui Li received the B.S. degree in the Internet of
Things engineering from Xidian University, China,
in 2018. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
in computer software and theory with the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology. His current research interests
include big data analysis, 5G, the Internet of Things
(IoT), and network spectrum allocation.

Claudio Savaglio (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from the University of Calabria in 2010, 2013,
and 2018, respectively. In 2013, he was a Visiting
Researcher with The University of Texas at Dallas,
TX, USA, the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
NJ, USA, in 2016, and the Universitat Politecnica de
Valencia, Valencia, Spain, in 2017. He is currently
a Post-Doctoral Researcher. His research interests
include the Internet of Things, edge computing,
network simulation, and agent-oriented middleware
and development methodologies.

Giancarlo Fortino (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the
University of Calabria (Unical), Italy, in 2000. He is
currently a Full Professor of computer engineering
with the Department of Informatics, Modeling, Electronics, and Systems, Unical. He is also a Guest
Professor with the Wuhan University of Technology, China, a High-End Expert with HUST, China,
and a Senior Research Fellow with the ICAR-CNR
Institute. He is the Director of the SPEME Lab,
Unical, and the Co-Chair of Joint labs on the IoT
established between Unical and WUT and SMU Chinese universities. His
research interests include agent-based computing, wireless (body) sensor
networks, and the IoT. He is the author of more than 400 articles in
international journals, conferences, and books. He is a member of the IEEE
SMCS BoG and the IEEE Press BoG and the Chair of the IEEE SMCS
Italian Chapter. He is the (Founding) Series Editor of the IEEE Press Book
Series on Human-Machine Systems, the EiC of Springer Book Series on
Internet of Things, and AE of many international journals, such as the IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC C ONTROL, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
H UMAN -M ACHINE S YSTEMS , the IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL,
the IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, the IEEE SMCM, Information Fusion, JNCA,
EAAI, and so on. He is the Co-Founder and the CEO of SenSysCal S.r.l.,
a Unical spinoff focused on the innovative IoT systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

