426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Self-Organized Routing for Autonomous Vehicles via
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Huaxin Pei , Jiawei Zhang , Yi Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Huile Xu , and Li Li , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Routing for autonomous vehicles with global traffic
information and sufficient direct cooperation among vehicles has
been widely studied to relieve traffic congestion in recent years.
However, the assembly rate of Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) equipment in practical traffic systems is currently and could be at a low
level in near future. Accordingly, autonomous vehicles can only
access localized traffic information, and direct cooperation among
them cannot always be guaranteed. Thus, how to optimize the
routing choices in such scenarios is worthy of particular attention.
In this article, we propose a self-organized routing strategy based on
deep reinforcement learning (DRL). Under the condition of limited
traffic information, the proposed self-organized mechanism well
organizes localized traffic conditions through vehicle-level routing
decisions, which are able to achieve network-wide benefits gains.
In the specified DRL, we propose a novel reward mechanism to
harmonize indirect interactions among vehicles by jointly learning
individual and overall efficiency, even if each vehicle is modified
to make individual decisions independently, rather than only focusing on individual interests as in the greedy strategy. Numerical
experiments demonstrate that the proposed self-organized strategy
is promising to resolve the routing problem from the perspective of
individual decision-making with limited traffic information.
Index Terms—Routing, self-organized, deep reinforcement
learning, autonomous vehicle.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE development of autonomous vehicles brings new potential for traffic congestion relief [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. At
the microscopic level, closer spacing between vehicles and better
passing sequence at conflict areas help improve link capacity and
intersection throughput, which has been well discussed in recent

T

Manuscript received 31 March 2022; revised 4 November 2022 and 16
January 2023; accepted 23 August 2023. Date of publication 8 September 2023;
date of current version 17 January 2024. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2020AAA0108104 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 52272420. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof.
Kumudu Munasinghe. (Corresponding author: Li Li.)
Huaxin Pei and Jiawei Zhang are with the Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: phx17@tsinghua.org.cn;
zhangjw20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Yi Zhang is with the Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China, also with Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China, and also with Jiangsu Province Collaborative
Innovation Center of Modern Urban Traffic Technologies, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210096, China (e-mail: zhyi@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Huile Xu is with the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail:
huile.xu@ia.ac.cn).
Li Li is with the Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: li-li@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2023.3311198

Fig. 1. Autonomous vehicles only have localized traffic information, and
direct cooperation between individual vehicles cannot always be guaranteed.

years [6], [7], [8]. At the macroscopic level, the “controllable”
route choice of autonomous vehicles offers more possibilities
for traffic management [9], [10], [11]. In this article, we are
interested in the macro-level route choice problem, which aims
to alleviate traffic congestion by providing vehicles with optimal
routes from their origins to predetermined destinations [12],
[13], [14]. Routing for autonomous vehicles has been receiving
increasing attention in the field of traffic control. Most existing
route planning methods for autonomous vehicles have practical
and inexplicit requirements, i.e., the global traffic information
is timely accessible for each vehicle and adequate direct interactions between vehicles are always guaranteed. However,
the application of V2X communication technology currently
faces several technical challenges. On the one hand, the negative
impacts of communication delay and packet loss on vehicle
movements cannot be ignored, especially for vehicles moving at
high speed. On the other hand, the interconnection between V2X
devices of different manufacturers, models and communication
modules has not been well realized [15], [16], [17]. As a result,
in practical traffic systems, the assembly rate and performance
of V2X equipment are currently at a low level and will possibly
remain limited for quite a period in the future. Resultantly, the
capability of vehicles in practice gets hindered with respect to the
information collection, storage, and processing. For example, in
Fig. 1, the red vehicle needs to move towards its destination, but
it can only access the traffic information in a small area nearby.
Thus, only localized traffic information is practically available
to autonomous vehicles herein. Moreover, not all vehicles are
equipped with V2X communication devices, and consequently,
direct cooperation between individual vehicles cannot always

0018-9545 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

be guaranteed, even in small areas. In such cases, most of
the existing routing algorithms are intractable to implement,
which motivates novel methods for the routing of autonomous
vehicles under localized information access and unassured direct
cooperation between vehicles, as we address in this article.
To break these limitations, one remedy could be to treat each
vehicle as an independent individual and then optimize its own
routing decision based on the limited traffic information that
can be perceived within a localized small area. Accordingly,
we propose a self-organized routing strategy for autonomous
vehicles by leveraging the DRL framework to well organize the
localized traffic state through individual decision-making and
then achieve overall efficiency gains. The agent in DRL learns a
good mapping of traffic states to route choices via extensive trialand-error interactions between the agent and the complex traffic
system [18], [19], [20], rather than relying on the simplified
estimation of traffic dynamics.
In our constructed self-organized mechanism, each vehicle
adaptively chooses the optimal successor link when it approaches one intersection node, and further routing choices
are made until subsequent intersection nodes are reached. As
shown in Fig. 1, the red vehicle only needs to determine the
upcoming link at the current time step. This mechanism can
enjoy the following merits. On the one hand, the individual
decision of each vehicle is based on the latest traffic information
at the current time step, i.e., the self-organized mechanism is
time-adaptive. On the other hand, each vehicle makes a localized
routing decision to choose the optimal successor link at one
single time step, so that the vehicles can flexibly respond to
the changes of localized traffic demands, i.e., the self-organized
mechanism is decision-flexible.
To attain overall efficiency based on self-organized routing,
a novel reward mechanism of DRL is established by jointly
considering the travel time of each individual vehicle and the
average travel time of all vehicles within its perceived range. It
avoids selfish routing from the excessive pursuit of individual
efficiency [21] and improves overall benefits guided by modest
route decisions incorporating global interests. Thus, the proposed reward mechanism enables harmonizing indirect interactions among vehicles, even if each vehicle makes decisions in
an independent manner. In addition, the travel time involved
in the designed long-term reward refers to the actual travel
time obtained by the interactions between the agent and the
environment, rather than the estimated travel time. Therefore, the
routing strategy optimized under the guidance of the proposed
reward function can be better adapted to the practical conditions
of the traffic systems, which provides a basis for ensuring the performance in applications. Numerical experiments have demonstrated that the proposed self-organized strategy is promising to
resolve the routing problem of autonomous vehicles from the
perspective of individual decision-making.
The main contributions of this article include: (a) we propose
a self-organized routing mechanism for autonomous vehicles
to address the current limits of localized information access
and the inability of direct cooperation among all vehicles; (b)
the designed reward mechanism enables harmonizing indirect
interactions among vehicles to achieve overall benefits, even if
each vehicle plans routes individually; (c) the routing policy

427

is optimized via extensive trial-and-error interactions between
the agent and the environment rather than heavily relying on
the estimation of traffic flow, which enables the trained policy
to better meet the practical conditions underlying the traffic
systems.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the related works. The self-organized routing mechanism is presented in Section III. Section IV introduces the
proposed DRL-based strategy for self-organized routing. The
training process and testing results are extensively evaluated in
Section V through numerical experiments. Brief conclusions and
promising future works are outlined in Section VI.

II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we give a brief review of the related works on
determining the traveling routes of autonomous vehicles through
traffic networks.
With the rapid development of autonomous driving technology, how to plan driving routes for autonomous vehicles has
received increasing attention in recent years. Many studies [22],
[23], [24], [25], [26] discuss the routing problem of autonomous
vehicles under the popular framework of traffic assignment that
allocates each origin-destination traffic flow value to various
alternative routes from a particular origin to the corresponding
destination. Then, optimization-based assignment approaches
are used to achieve either user-equilibrium [27], [28] or systemoptimum [29]. For instance, Guo et al. [22] formulate an optimal control problem with equilibrium constraints, where the
route choice of autonomous vehicles is modeled by the systemoptimal principle and the link dynamics are described by a
traffic flow model based on double queue. Wang et al. [23]
build a user-equilibrium model for connected and automated
vehicles by leveraging their capability of acquiring accurate
traffic information, where the Bureau of Public Roads (BPR)
function is utilized to estimate link travel cost in the constructed
traffic assignment model, as used in many similar studies,
e.g., [24], [30]. These studies focus on rather static and global
network-wide routing, and their ability to flexibly respond to
the changes in localized traffic demands needs to be enhanced.
The optimization model of traffic assignment heavily relies on
the simplified estimation model of link dynamics that cannot
accurately portray the characteristics of vehicle movements.
Moreover, these models challenge the availability of sufficient
global traffic information for vehicles. Correspondingly, a few
latest studies have attempted to resolve the routing problem of
autonomous vehicles from different technical perspectives [31],
[32], [33], [34], [35]. In [31], [32], [33], the routing algorithms
are designed based on the detailed motion information of vehicles without relying on the estimation of link dynamics, but they
still assume global traffic information for the network-wide routing. In [34] and [35], the localized traffic information is utilized
to realize adaptive routing for vehicles, where the estimation of
link dynamics and sufficient direct interactions between vehicles
are required.
In fact, underlying these aforementioned route planning methods, there exist practical and inexplicit requirements, i.e., the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

428

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Illustration of the proposed self-organized routing mechanism, which is time-adaptive and decision-flexible.

global traffic information acquisition and adequate direct cooperation among vehicles are always guaranteed, which poses a
great challenge to the information collection, storage, and processing capacities of autonoumous vehicles at the current stage.
III. SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING MECHANISM
In this section, a self-organized mechanism is introduced for
autonomous vehicles, addressing the current limits of localized
information access and the inability of direct cooperation among
all vehicles.
A. Traffic Network Description
As shown in Fig. 2, we study the problem of routing for
autonomous vehicles in a typical urban traffic network, i.e.,
grid network. Each vehicle moving in this traffic network has
a specific origin-destination. Due to the limited capability of
information collection, storage, and processing, each vehicle
can only access localized traffic information in determining the
route. Without loss of generality, we assume that vehicles have
access to traffic information within a range of four downstream
intersections, i.e., the red area shown in Fig. 2. In addition, direct
cooperation between vehicles cannot always be guaranteed even
in such localized areas, since not all vehicles are equipped with
V2X communication devices. Thus, how to optimize the routing
choices under localized information access and unassured direct
cooperation between vehicles is worthy of particular attention.
B. Self-Organized Routing Mechanism Design
Considering the practical traffic systems, we propose a selforganized routing mechanism, which turns to treat each vehicle
as an independent individual and then optimize its own routing
decision based on the limited traffic information that can be perceived within a localized small area. It is worth mentioning that
each vehicle should jointly consider its individual efficiency and

the overall benefits of its perceived range when making its own
routing decisions, which can well organize the corresponding
localized traffic conditions and ultimately improve the efficiency
of the entire traffic network. Thus, we name it self-organized
routing.
In our constructed self-organized routing mechanism, we
prescribe that each vehicle adaptively chooses the optimal successor link when it approaches one intersection node, and further
routing choices are made only when later intersection nodes are
reached. Moreover, the candidate links need to be in the directions approaching the destination, which requires the vehicles
not to choose long routes. As shown in Fig. 2, the routing choice
of the red vehicle in Step 1, Step 2, or Step 3 includes traveling
to the right (Route 1) or to the downside (Route 2) since the
destination is toward the lower right side of the vehicle. The red
vehicle in Step 1 needs to make its first decision based on the
traffic information within the red area. Assuming that the vehicle
selects Route 2 in Step 1, it will proceed to Step 2, where the
vehicle has two optional choices. Similarly, the red vehicle will
then go to Step 3 if it chooses Route 1 in Step 2. Finally, the
vehicle will only have one optional route after Step 3 and reach
its destination.
The above descriptions indicate that each individual vehicle
in a grid urban traffic network actually tackles similar basic
traffic network and optional routes within its perceived range
in deciding the routing, e.g., the red area in Fig. 2, where each
vehicle has access to traffic information within a small grid network with four intersections and has two optional routes within
its perceived range. Thus, under the proposed self-organized
mechanism, we focus on addressing the routing of each vehicle
in the basic traffic networks, and the traffic conditions in these
basic traffic networks can jointly reflect the traffic condition of
the entire traffic network. As a result, it is possible to optimize
these basic traffic networks so that different localized regions
of the entire traffic network can get optimized, thus achieving
overall benefit gains. This characteristic ensures that the learned

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

policy trained in such basic traffic networks is applicable to all
autonomous vehicles in the entire traffic network. In addition,
the proposed self-organized routing mechanism also enjoys the
following merits:
1) Time-Adaptive Property: Each vehicle dynamically
makes routing choices in different time steps so that the
traffic information utilized by the vehicle in each decision is
up-to-date, thereby coping well with the strong time-varying
nature of traffic state and then improving the performance of
route choice.
2) Decision-Flexible Property: Each vehicle makes only localized routing decision to choose the optimal successor link at
a single time step so that the vehicle can flexibly respond to the
changes in localized traffic demands. This property overcomes
the limitations of many existing algorithms focusing on static
and global network-wide routing.
IV. DRL BASED SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING STRATEGY
In this section, under the proposed self-organized mechanism,
a DRL-based routing strategy is constructed to well organize
the localized traffic conditions via the optimization of the basic traffic network, which can ultimately achieve the benefit
improvement of the entire traffic network. As described in
Section III-B, the basic traffic network refers to the small network within the perceived range of each vehicle. We formulate
the routing problem in the basic traffic network as a Markov
decision process (MDP) in Section IV-A and then introduce the
DRL model for addressing the formulated MDP in Section IV-B.
A. Problem Formulation for Routing in Basic Traffic Network
In this article, our goal is to find a policy that can make
routing decisions for continuously arriving vehicles, ultimately
achieving overall efficiency improvement. In such a case, the
routing problem is a sequential decision problem, and the transitions of the traffic state within the basic traffic network can
be determined by the most recent state and routing action, i.e.,
the routing problem satisfies the Markov property [36], [37].
As a result, we formulate the routing problem of a group of
vehicles in the basic traffic network as an MDP in terms of a tuple
S, A, R, T, γ [38], [39]. The tuple is composed of state space
S, action space A, reward function R, state transition model
T , and a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1]. With an episodic task of M
vehicles continuously arriving, routing, and then leaving, the
goal of optimizing this MDP is to alleviate the traffic congestion
caused by the determination of driving routes of vehicles. The
agent learns a policy π(at | st ) to make appropriate routing
choices at for different vehicles based on observations st to
maximize the expected discounted sum of rewards, i.e.,
Rt =

M
+t−1

γ τ −t rτ ,

(1)

τ =t

where rτ represents the reward at time τ . The action-value
function Qπ (s, a) is the expected return following a policy π,
i.e.,
Qπ (s, a) = E [Rt | st = s, at = a, π] .

(2)

429

The objective of MDP is to find the optimal policy π ∗ by
maximizing the action-value function, i.e.,
Q∗ (s, a) = max Qπ (s, a).
π

(3)

The state space, action space, and reward function of the
formulated MDP are defined as follows.
1) State Space: When the vehicle reaches the entrance of the
basic traffic network at time t, the state st needs to describe the
traffic state of each link within the basic traffic network.
In our method, we decompose the links of the traffic network
into different cells, and the vehicles can make routing choices
by observing the traffic density within each cell, as shown in
Fig. 3(a). We specify that the number of cells on different links
is the same and the length of each cell needs to be determined
according to the length of the link, thus adapting to different
lengths of links. This cell-based link model has the following two
advantages. Compared with the method that directly considers
the location of each vehicle, the cell-based link model can
decrease the size of state space and reduce the adverse impacts
caused by inaccurate location information of the surrounding
vehicles, especially under conditions where direct interaction
between vehicles cannot always be guaranteed. Compared with
the method that takes the whole link as the basic unit, the
cell-based link model can describe the traffic state of the network
more accurately so that the agent can carry out more fine-grained
decisions.
After link decomposition, we describe the traffic density of
each cell using one-hot encoding technique to further reduce
the size of state space. Specifically, we divide the traffic density
of one cell into a density intervals and define an a-dimensional
one-hot encoding vector Di to denote the traffic density of cell
i. When the traffic density of cell i is in the kth range, Dik is set
to 1, and other elements of Di are set to 0. Therefore, the state
st is defined as


(4)
st = D1 , D2 , . . ., DN ,
where N denotes the number of cells in the basic traffic network,
and st is the input of the DRL model.
Further, we incorporate the domain knowledge of traffic flow
dynamics into the interval division of traffic density in each
cell, which facilitates enhancing the accuracy of traffic density
description when implementing one-hot encoding. According
to the traffic fundamental diagram shown in Fig. 3(b), one can
notice that the relationship between the actual traffic density and
critical density nc has a large impact on traffic efficiency [40],
and more details on the calculation of the critical density can
refer to [33], [41], [42]. Therefore, we incorporate the information of critical density into state space design to dynamically
determine the interval division of traffic density in each cell.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 3(c), we take (b · nc ) as the
upper bound and evenly divide [0, b · nc ) into (a − 1) density
intervals, which correspond to the 1th ∼ (a − 1)th dimensions
of Di , respectively. In addition, we define [b · nc , +∞) as an
independent density interval corresponding to the ath dimension
of Di to indicate whether the traffic is in a very congested state
or not. Note that the values of a and b need to simultaneously

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Illustration of state design. (a) shows the decomposed links into different cells. (b) presents the fundamental diagram of each cell, and the critical density
is highlighted. (c) illustrates the method of using one-hot encoding vector to describe the traffic state by incorporating the information of critical density.

consider the size of state space and the accuracy of density
description, in order to keep a good balance between training
difficulty and the performance of the learned policy.
2) Action Space: Action at is the driving route assigned to
the newly arrived vehicle based on the observed state st . As
described in Section III-B, the proposed self-organized routing
mechanism prescribes that each vehicle only determines the
optimal successor link. In our method, we define that each
candidate link is considered as an action, and the number of
actions contained in the action set A is equal to the number of
candidate links. For example, there are two candidate routes for
vehicles in the basic traffic network in Fig. 2. Thus, the action
space is then defined as


(5)
A = a1 , a2 ,
where a1 and a2 denote that the agent chooses Route 1 and Route
2, respectively.
3) Reward Function: Reward rt is the feedback given by the
environment after the agent takes an action at . It is a key part
of MDP because the reward function R implicitly characterizes
the learning goal of the agent.
In our method, the reward function is designed to encode the
target of self-organized routing to decrease the average travel
time of vehicles within the basic traffic network, thus ultimately
improving the efficiency of the entire traffic network. However,
the impact of an individual vehicle’s route choice on the average
travel time through the traffic network is excessively delayed,
and the agent cannot get an immediate return, which leads to
great difficulty in the training process.
In order to help the agent learn the optimal policy successfully,
we design the reward function by jointly deploying short-term
and long-term rewards. In our proposed reward function, the
involved short-term rewards reveal the efficiency of individual
vehicles and can be obtained immediately when the agent takes
an action. The long-term reward considers the overall efficiency,
and the environment return is received at the end of each episode.
To this end, we define the reward rt in the commonly used linear

combination [20], i.e.,
rt = rs + [repisode ]M ,

(6)

where rs is the short-term reward, and repisode denotes the longterm reward of each period. [·]M indicates that the long-term
reward is non-zero after the agent completes the routing task
of M vehicles in each period; otherwise, the long-term reward
is zero. In the following, the well-designed rs and repisode are
introduced in detail.
The short-term goal of the reward function needs to guide the
vehicle to select the link with the shortest estimated travel time
among all the candidate links, avoiding increasing the travel time
of the current vehicle by selecting the congested links. In our
method, we use the BPR function to estimate the travel time of
each link. This function illustrates the relationship between the
free-flow travel time and the actual travel time [30], [43], [44],
i.e.,


f
xi (t)
est
free
1+e
,
(7)
Ti (t) = Ti
Ci
where Tiest (t) denotes the estimated travel time of link i at time t,
and Tifree denotes the free flow travel time of link i. xi (t) denotes
the accumulated number of vehicles in link i at time t. Ci is
the capacity of link i, which can be calculated according to the
average gap between vehicles and the physical characteristics
of the link [30], [33]. e and f are the parameters of the model.
Based on the estimated travel time of candidate links, we then
define the short-term reward as
rs = α ·

est
(t)
maxi Tiest (t) − Troute
,
maxi Tiest (t) − mini Tiest (t)

(8)

est
where Troute
(t) is the estimated travel time of the link chosen by
the agent at time t and α is a scaling coefficient. However, this
greedy allocation of driving routes based on the estimated link
travel time at the current time has two limitations as follows.
On the one hand, due to the uncertainty in the traffic system,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

there may be a large difference between the estimated and the
actual travel times, which leads to the chosen route not always
having the shortest travel time for the current vehicle. On the
other hand, the greedy strategy makes a decision in favor of the
individual based only on the current traffic information, where
the future traffic state and the overall benefits are not considered.
In this sense, the action taken by the agent can be too selfish
and consequently affect the overall efficiency [21]. Thus, the
long-term goal is essential for the reward function to harmonize
indirect cooperation between different individuals in our tasks.
The long-term goal in the reward function needs to guide
the agent to make each decision that should be beneficial to
decrease the average travel time of all vehicles in the basic
traffic network. The advantages of designing long-term goals
in the reward function include the following two points. Firstly,
the long-term reward is the result of system operation rather
than relying on the estimation of link travel time, which not
only helps improve the performance of the proposed routing
strategy but also satisfies the practical conditions underlying the
current traffic systems. Secondly, long-term rewards can harmonize indirect interactions among individual vehicles, thereby
improving overall benefits albeit with independent individual
decisions. However, the excessively delayed impact of routing
decisions on the average travel time of all vehicles leads to great
difficulty in the training process. To mitigate this obstacle, we
use the average performance of M routing tasks to reflect the
long-term goal of our reward function. Specifically, the learning
process of the agent is formulated into a periodic mission, and M
vehicles complete the routing tasks in each period. This allows
the routing policy to be evaluated in a timely manner and retains
the characteristics of delayed feedback.
As described in Section III, each vehicle can obtain the traffic
information within the range of two downstream links, and only
decides the optimal successor link to enter next. In our method,
we specify that a vehicle is considered to pass the basic traffic
network when it leaves the second downstream link, and the
time spent in this process is regarded as the travel time of the
corresponding vehicle through the current basic traffic network.
For each vehicle, the first downstream link is determined by the
routing policy, while the second downstream link is randomly
chosen by considering the destination of the corresponding
vehicle. Analogously, we define the long-term reward as a linear
mapping of the average travel time of M vehicles, such that
repisode = p

M


Titravel /M + q,

(9)

i=1

where Titravel is the actual travel time of vehicle i. p and q are
the scaling coefficients to map the long-term reward repisode to
an appropriate range considering the short-term reward rs .
B. DRL Model for Self-Organized Routing
To address the above MDP, the traditional approach (e.g.,
dynamic programming [6], [45], [46]) can suffer from significant challenges because it relies on the complete knowledge
of the environment model, which is unclear in the MDP of

431

routing. Fortunately, reinforcement learning (RL) can be flexibly applied to search for the optimal policy π ∗ (the optimal
mapping from state to action) without the complete environment
model by maximizing the cumulative reward through continuous
interaction between the agent and the environment. However,
limited by computational and storage resources, traditional RL
is prohibited in solving problems with high-dimensional inputs
and delayed rewards like in the routing tasks. With the aid of
deep neural network (DNN), DRL has shown great potential
to handle such high-dimensional and yet coupled nonlinear
decision problems.
Solving the problem formulated in Section IV-A with DRL
faces the following challenges: a) the reward of the MDP is
sparse, and most randomly selected experiences contribute little
to the routing policy training; b) the environment is dynamic,
and many random factors can interfere with the training process,
such as the arrival time and turning actions of vehicles. To deal
with the above challenges, we adopt the Double Dueling DeepQ-Network to train the routing policy, which is derived from
the original Deep-Q-Network (DQN), and its effectiveness in
improving the performance of DQN has been verified in many
applications [20], [47].
The original DQN model adopts DNN to approximate the
action-value function of MDP. Experience replay and target
network are two popular techniques to improve the algorithm
performance [19]. As shown in Fig. 4, during training, DQN
takes the current state st as the input and then outputs the Q
value of each state-action pair when a new vehicle arrives at
the entrance of the traffic network, where the agent chooses a
route (i.e., at ) for the vehicle according to the ε−greedy strategy.
Then, the state of the traffic network is updated from st to st+1 ,
and the agent can get the reward feedback rt of action at from the
environment. In this way, a complete transition (st , at , rt , st+1 )
is attained. To remove the correlations of transitions, DQN stores
each transition in a dataset, i.e., Experience Memory Pool in
Fig. 4, and then the evaluation network gets trained by experience replay. These transitions sampled from the Experience
Memory Pool are used to calculate the following loss function
(i.e., temporal difference (TD) error), and the stochastic gradient
descent is performed to optimize the parameters θ of DNN, i.e.,
⎡



L(θ) = E ⎣ rt +γ maxQ̂ st+1 , at+1 ; θ̂ −Q (st , at ; θ)
at+1

2

⎤
⎦,

(10)
where Q(θ) and Q̂(θ̂) denote the evaluation network and target network, respectively, which have the same structure. The
parameters θ̂ of the target network are updated by copying the
parameters θ of the evaluation network at regular steps.
However, the above-mentioned challenges make it difficult for
the original DQN to converge to a good policy in an efficient and
stable manner. First, to cope with the challenges posed by reward
sparsity, we deploy the Prioritized Experience Replay technique
to select valuable transitions in the Experience Memory Pool
instead of uniform sampling [48]. Its main idea is to make
transitions with higher TD errors have a higher probability to
be sampled. This technique accelerates the training process of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 4.

Architecture of the proposed self-organized routing with deep reinforcement learning.

DQN and converges into a better policy. Second, the target Q
value of the original DQN is calculated by the greedy idea, which
helps quickly bring the Q value closer to the optimization target
but leads to over-estimation [49]. To solve this problem, we use
Double DQN to decouple the action selection in target Q value
and the calculation of target Q value [50]. In Double DQN, (10)
is replaced by


L(θ) = E

TABLE I
LAYOUT OF THE DESIGNED ROUTING DQN

rt + γ Q̂ st+1 , argmaxQ(st+1 , at+1 ); θ̂


at+1

−Q (st , at ; θ))2 .

(11)

Third, to have a better policy evaluation, we adopt Dueling
DQN [51] to optimize the structure of the Q-network, which
is composed of two parts, i.e., state value function V(st ; θ) and
action advantage function A(st , at ; θ). In this case, the Q value
can be calculated as
Q(st , at ; θ) = V (st ; θ)

+

A(st , at ; θ) −

1 
A (s, a ; θ) ,
|A| 
a ∈A

(12)
where |A| denotes the dimension of the action space. At this
point, Double Dueling DQN with Prioritized Experience Replay
is established to learn a promising routing policy for autonomous
vehicles.
For the routing task, Table I presents the details on the architecture of DQN to approximate Q function. A two-layer fully
connected neural network with a dueling structure is designed
to tackle the current routing state and output the state value
and the advantage value of each action. Then, the Q value

of each state-action pair can be calculated according to (12).
In addition, we have also tried other algorithms with a more
complex and deeper architecture, but the experimental results
show that these methods lead to an increase in computation
time and cannot contribute much to the routing performance.
Therefore, the architecture of the designed DQN is a good way to
balance computational complexity and algorithm performance.
The DRL-based self-organized routing strategy is now constructed in Section IV-A and Section IV-B. With the help of
DRL, the obtained routing policy enables harmonizing indirect
interactions among individual vehicles to improve the traffic
condition within each basic traffic network so that different localized regions of the entire traffic network can be optimized, and
then together to overall benefit gains. The design of state space,
reward mechanism, and training algorithm jointly contribute to
maintaining a good trade-off between the training difficulty and
the performance of the learned policy.
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
In this section, numerical experiments are conducted from
different aspects to evaluate our proposed self-organized routing.
Section V-A presents the training process and testing results of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

Fig. 5. Cumulative reward in the training process under the proposed reward
function.

the basic traffic network, and Section V-B evaluates the reward
mechanism of our method. In Section V-C, the learned routing
policy is deployed in a large-scale traffic network to verify
the algorithm performance. As commonly used in the traffic
studies [33], [52], [53], [54], the Cell Transmission Model is
utilized to describe how vehicle flow travels in the traffic network
in the following experiments. More detailed setups about vehicle
flow dynamics can be found in [33]. All numerical experiments
in this article are carried out with Python, which allows the
creation of a simulation platform to accurately and flexibly
describe the road network structure, the vehicle flow dynamics
model, and the vehicle routing strategy.
A. Training and Testing Results in Basic Traffic Network
According to the designed self-organized routing mechanism,
we train the routing policy in the basic traffic network shown in
Fig. 2. The length of each link l between two adjacent conflict
areas is set as 1 km, and the maximum speed limit vmax of each
link is set as 50 km/h. The headway ha between autonomous
vehicles is set as 1 s. Similar to the previous studies [40], [45],
we assume that vehicles arrive in a Poisson Process at each input
link. In this experiment, the arrival rate λ of vehicles at each
input link is set as 1000veh/link/h. We adopt a 20-dimensional
one-hot encoding vector to denote the traffic state in each cell,
i.e., the parameter a in the state space design in Section IV-A1)
is equal to 20. Another parameter b related to the division of
density intervals is set as 2. In the designed reward function, as
suggested in [30], parameters e and f in (7) are set as 1 and 2,
respectively. The scaling coefficient α in the short-term reward
(8) is set as 0.2. The scaling coefficients p and q to map the
long-term reward (9) to an appropriate range are set as −6 and
2820, respectively. The number of vehicles considered in each
episode is set as 300, and the frame skip technique is adopted to
improve the training performance [55], [56].
1) Training Results: Fig. 5 presents the cumulative reward
value of each episode in the training process under the proposed
reward function. We calculate the rolling mean value of the

Fig. 6.

433

Average travel time of vehicles in the training process.

cumulative reward for a clearer presentation, and the size of
the rolling window is set as 20. According to Fig. 5, we can
find that the cumulative reward increases significantly after 2000
episodes and eventually converges to a stable value around 5000
episodes. It indicates that the agent has learned a good routing
policy for autonomous vehicles according to the designed reward
mechanism.
As described in Section IV-A, the proposed reward function
aims to reduce the travel time of vehicles passing through the
basic traffic network. Thus, we also count the average travel
time of vehicles in the training process, as shown in Fig. 6, and
the rolling mean value is also presented. Fig. 6 demonstrates
that the average travel time of vehicles decreases sharply after
2000 episodes. Specifically, the value of the average travel time
of vehicles is reduced from 473 s to 458 s in the basic traffic
network. This result verifies the effectiveness of our method in
the tackled basic traffic network, which shows great potential
to improve traffic efficiency, particularly for a large-scale traffic
network as later presented in Section V-C.
2) Testing Results: To verify the performance of the learned
routing policy, we compare it with the other two routing strategies, i.e., random routing strategy and greedy routing strategy,
on the average travel time of vehicles in the basic traffic network.
The random routing strategy specifies that each vehicle chooses
a traveling route randomly among the optional routes when it
reaches the entrance of the traffic network, regardless of the
impact of the traffic state within the traffic network on routing
decisions. As mentioned in Section IV-A, vehicles under greedy
routing select one route with the shortest estimated travel time
when they need to make a routing decision, and the estimated
travel time can be calculated according to (7) using BPR function. In this experiment, the average arrival rate of vehicles varies
from 600veh/link/h to 1400veh/link/h. We simulate a 20-minutes
continuous traffic process to collect the average travel time
through the basic traffic network. For each setting, 10 runs are
conducted and the average results are reported in Fig. 7.
The results in Fig. 7 show that the greedy routing strategy
has a better performance in decreasing the average travel time
of vehicles than the random routing strategy, and this can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

434

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Testing results of the learned policy in the basic traffic network.

due to the reason that the greedy routing strategy can obtain the
estimated travel time according to the real-time traffic states
and then select the route with the shortest estimated travel
time. This result indicates that appropriate consideration of the
traffic state can help improve traffic efficiency when making
routing decisions, and random selection can lead to inferior
performance, even in a symmetrical traffic network.
In Fig. 7, the learned routing policy in our strategy significantly outperforms the greedy routing strategy under various
arrival rates. This result indicates that the proposed DRL-based
routing model has learned a better policy and thus can optimize
the routing decisions based on the obtained limited traffic information. Such effectiveness can be traced to the following
reasons: a) The greedy strategy only emphasizes individual
efficiency without considering the overall efficiency and thus
leads to selfish routing decisions, while our proposed routing
strategy considers both individual and overall benefits, which
jointly promote the improvement of traffic efficiency in the traffic
network. b) The performance of the greedy routing strategy is
determined by the estimation model that cannot accurately and
explicitly describe the link travel time in the complex traffic
system. In contrast, the rewards of our DRL-based routing
strategy are the result of system operation rather than relying on
the estimation model. In particular, our strategy is not restricted
to the existing assumptions that are currently inconsistent with
the practical traffic system and thus has been delicately designed
to better utilize limited traffic state information at hand in making
decisions.
B. Evaluation on the Reward Functions
In this experiment, we evaluate the reward mechanism of our
method by comparing the impacts of different reward functions
on training performance. Three types of rewards are considered,
i.e., reward rs alone, reward repisode alone, and the proposed
reward mechanism (rs + repisode ). rs alone is the short-term
reward and only emphasizes the individual efficiency, and repisode
is the long-term reward and describes the overall efficiency.

Fig. 8. Average travel time of vehicles in the training process under different
reward functions.

The performance of the learned policy can be evaluated by the
average travel time of vehicles, as shown in Fig. 8. It can be
seen from Fig. 8 that, the joint optimization of short-term and
long-term returns in the proposed reward function gives the best
performance in decreasing the average travel time of vehicles.
Emphasizing the short-term reward alone brings a trivial contribution to the decrease in average travel time. Specifically, the
average travel time under the reward rs alone is only reduced by
about 2 s. Compared with rs alone, the average travel time under
repisode alone can be effectively reduced, which demonstrates
the significance of the designed long-term reward function in
optimizing overall efficiency. However, only using the long-term
reward fails to catch up sufficient explorations on the intermediate dynamic information during the training process, and thus
can tend to converge to a local optimal policy. Therefore, the
well-designed reward mechanism can successfully exploit the
timely dynamics during the training and also explore overall
benefits, which together assist to guarantee an optimized routing
policy from the learning.

C. Testing Results in Large-Scale Traffic Network
To verify the performance of the proposed self-organized
routing strategy in a general traffic network, we implement the
testing experiment in a large-scale 5 × 5 grid network shown in
Fig. 9, which contains 25 intersections.
In this experiment, we also compare the proposed strategy
with the random routing strategy and the greedy routing strategy,
introduced in Section V-A. For comparison purposes, the vehicles traveling between 4 × 4 representative origin-destination
pairs are evaluated, where the origins are marked in green and
the destinations are marked in red in Fig. 9. Here, each vehicle
coming from the green entrance will randomly choose a red exit
as its destination. The arrival rate at each input link varies from
600veh/link/h to 1400veh/link/h, and we simulate a 40-minutes
continuous traffic process for the numerical results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

435

Fig. 10. Comparison results of different routing strategies in terms of traffic
throughput.

Fig. 9.
mance.

Large-scale traffic network scenario used to test the routing perfor-

TABLE II
COMPARISON RESULTS OF DIFFERENT STRATEGIES IN TERMS OF AVERAGE
TRAVEL TIME IN LARGE-SCALE TRAFFIC NETWORK

Fig. 11. Kernal density plot of vehicle travel time under different routing
strategies. The arrival rate is set as 1000veh/link/h in this experiment.

To present more valid evaluations, the comparison results are
highlighted from three aspects in this experiment. Firstly, the
average travel time of vehicles passing through the large-scale
traffic network under various arrival rates is listed in Table II,
where the average performance of 10 runs is reported. Secondly,
we also count the traffic throughput between these 4 × 4 origindestination pairs, which refers to the total number of vehicles that
have passed the traffic network from the corresponding 4 origins
to the corresponding 4 destinations, and the results are shown
in Fig. 10. Thirdly, the distribution of vehicle travel time is an
important metric reflecting the stability of routing performance,
so we also conduct an experiment to explore the distributions of

vehicle travel time under different routing strategies, as shown in
Fig. 11, where the arrival rate of vehicles is set as 1000veh/link/h.
It can be found in Table II that the proposed self-organized
routing strategy distinctively decreases the average travel time
of vehicles passing through the large-scale traffic network under
various traffic demand settings, compared to the random routing
and the greedy routing strategies. In terms of traffic throughput
in Fig. 10, our proposed strategy also effectively improves
the traffic throughput, especially with large traffic demands.
These two types of results validate the promising performance
of the proposed strategy in improving overall benefits. As for
the stability of routing performance, Fig. 11 illustrates that the
general distribution of vehicle travel time resulted from the
proposed strategy has not changed significantly, compared to
those from the random routing and the greedy routing strategies.
Yet importantly, the travel time of vehicles under the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

strategy has decreased in overall ranges. This finding assures
the overall stability of the proposed strategy so that extreme
conditions can be prevented, such as the cases where parts of
the vehicles have very short travel time while many others have
very long travel time, and a seemly good average result is then
insufficient to reveal solid evaluations herein.
Two key conclusions can be obtained from the above interesting findings in the application to the large-scale traffic networks:
a) The routing policy trained in the basic traffic network can be
deployed in a general traffic network without a re-training process; b) The proposed DRL-based routing strategy can achieve
overall benefits gains through individual decisions using limited
traffic information. Therefore, the designed self-organized routing strategy can effectively tackle the routing problem, which is
of particular significance in situations where only limited traffic
information is available and direct interactions between vehicles
cannot always be guaranteed.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, a novel strategy is constructed to tackle the
route planning problem with localized temporal-spatial traffic
information, namely self-organized routing. Through modeling
the basic traffic networks that all individual vehicles typically
tackle in deciding the routing during driving, the self-organized
mechanism is established for such basic traffic networks and is
equipped in each individual vehicle. Correspondingly, a DRLbased algorithm is proposed together with a well-designed reward mechanism to learn an optimal policy for the decisionmaking of routing, where not only the short-term reward is
utilized to exploit immediate traffic dynamics in intermediate
time steps but also the long-term reward reflecting the overall
performance is also utilized. Thus, the proposed strategy is
capable of gaining overall benefits by well organizing localized traffic conditions through individual decisions and indirect
interactions among individuals. In numerical experiments, the
training and testing results verify that the proposed strategy
can well resolve the routing problem using localized traffic
information and improve the overall efficiency under various
experiment settings.
For further research, it would be interesting to investigate
the self-organized routing with more randomized geometric
structures and mixed traffics, where some modifications to the
state space design are required.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Pei, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pei, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Fault-tolerant
cooperative driving at signal-free intersections,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2023.
[2] R. Valiente, B. Toghi, R. Pedarsani, and Y. P. Fallah, “Robustness and
adaptability of reinforcement learning-based cooperative autonomous
driving in mixed-autonomy traffic,” IEEE Open J. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 3, pp. 397–410, 2022.
[3] Y. Hu, C. Chen, J. He, and B. Yang, “Eco-platooning for cooperative
automated vehicles under mixed traffic flow,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2023–2034, Apr. 2021.
[4] L. Cui, Z. Chen, A. Wang, J. Hu, and B. B. Park, “Development of a robust
cooperative adaptive cruise control with dynamic topology,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4279–4290, May 2022.

[5] C. Xu, W. Zhao, J. Liu, C. Wang, and C. Lv, “An integrated decisionmaking framework for highway autonomous driving using combined
learning and rule-based algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71,
no. 4, pp. 3621–3632, Apr. 2022.
[6] H. Pei, S. Feng, Y. Zhang, and D. Yao, “A cooperative driving strategy for
merging at on-ramps based on dynamic programming,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 11646–11656, Dec. 2019.
[7] H. Pei, Y. Zhang, Q. Tao, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Distributed cooperative
driving in multi-intersection road networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5390–5403, Jun. 2021.
[8] C. Liu, C. W. Lin, S. Shiraishi, and M. Tomizuka, “Distributed conflict
resolution for connected autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18–29, Mar. 2018.
[9] Y. Yao, Z. Peng, and B. Xiao, “Parallel hyper-heuristic algorithm for multiobjective route planning in a smart city,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67,
no. 11, pp. 10307–10318, Nov. 2018.
[10] S. Wollenstein-Betech, M. Salazar, A. Houshmand, M. Pavone, I. C.
Paschalidis, and C. G. Cassandras, “Routing and rebalancing intermodal
autonomous mobility-on-demand systems in mixed traffic,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 12263–12275, Aug. 2022.
[11] Q. Zhang, K. Wu, and Y. Shi, “Route planning and power management for
PHEVs with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69,
no. 5, pp. 4751–4762, May 2020.
[12] J. Li et al., “A traffic prediction enabled double rewarded value iteration
network for route planning,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 5,
pp. 4170–4181, May 2019.
[13] C. Menelaou, S. Timotheou, P. Kolios, C. G. Panayiotou, and M. M.
Polycarpou, “Minimizing traffic congestion through continuous-time route
reservations with travel time predictions,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 141–153, Mar. 2019.
[14] Y. Fu, C. Li, F. R. Yu, T. H. Luan, and Y. Zhang, “Hybrid autonomous driving guidance strategy combining deep reinforcement learning and expert
system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11273–11286,
Aug. 2022.
[15] S. Gyawali, S. Xu, Y. Qian, and R. Q. Hu, “Challenges and solutions for
cellular based V2X communications,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 222–255, First Quarter 2021.
[16] K. Abboud, H. A. Omar, and W. Zhuang, “Interworking of DSRC and
cellular network technologies for V2X communications: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9457–9470, Dec. 2016.
[17] M. Lucas-Estañ et al., “An analytical latency model and evaluation of
the capacity of 5G NR to support V2X services using V2N2V communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 2293–2306,
Feb. 2023.
[18] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2018.
[19] V. Mnih et al., “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.5602.
[20] J. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Li, Y. Li, and H. Dong, “A bi-level cooperative operation
approach for AGV based automated valet parking,” Transp. Res. Part C:
Emerg. Technol., vol. 128, 2021, Art. no. 103140.
[21] T. Roughgarden and É. Tardos, “How bad is selfish routing?,” J. ACM,
vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 236–259, 2002.
[22] Q. Guo, X. J. Ban, and H. A. Aziz, “Mixed traffic flow of human driven
vehicles and automated vehicles on dynamic transportation networks,”
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 128, 2021, Art. no. 103159.
[23] J. Wang, S. Peeta, and X. He, “Multiclass traffic assignment model
for mixed traffic flow of human-driven vehicles and connected and
autonomous vehicles,” Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol., vol. 126,
pp. 139–168, 2019.
[24] K. Zhang and Y. M. Nie, “Mitigating the impact of selfish routing: An
optimal-ratio control scheme (ORCS) inspired by autonomous driving,”
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 87, pp. 75–90, 2018.
[25] M. H. Mansourianfar, Z. Gu, S. T. Waller, and M. Saberi, “Joint routing
and pricing control in congested mixed autonomy networks,” Transp. Res.
Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 131, 2021, Art. no. 103338.
[26] A. Hajbabaie and R. F. Benekohal, “A program for simultaneous network
signal timing optimization and traffic assignment,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2573–2586, Oct. 2015.
[27] J. G. Wardrop, “Road paper. Some theoretical aspects of road traffic research,” Proc. Inst. Civil Engineers, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 325–362,
1952.
[28] M. S. Daskin, “Urban transportation networks: Equilibrium analysis with
mathematical programming methods,” Transp. Sci., vol. 19, pp. 463–466,
1985.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEI et al.: SELF-ORGANIZED ROUTING FOR AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES VIA DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

[29] P. Kachroo and N. Shlayan, “Dynamic traffic assignment: A survey of
mathematical models and techniques,” in Advances in Dynamic Network
Modeling in Complex Transportation Systems. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2013, pp. 1–25.
[30] S. Bahrami and M. J. Roorda, “Optimal traffic management policies for
mixed human and automated traffic flows,” Transp. Res. Part A: Policy
Pract., vol. 135, pp. 130–143, 2020.
[31] Y. An, M. Li, X. Lin, F. He, and H. Yang, “Space-time routing in dedicated
automated vehicle zones,” Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 120,
2020, Art. no. 102777.
[32] X. Lin, M. Li, Z.-J. M. Shen, Y. Yin, and F. He, “Rhythmic control of
automated traffic-Part II: Grid network rhythm and online routing,” Transp.
Sci., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 988–1009, 2021.
[33] D. A. Lazar, E. Bıyık, D. Sadigh, and R. Pedarsani, “Learning how to
dynamically route autonomous vehicles on shared roads,” Transp. Res.
Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 130, 2021, Art. no. 103258.
[34] A. Mostafizi, C. Koll, and H. Wang, “A decentralized and coordinated
routing algorithm for connected and autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11505–11517, Aug. 2022.
[35] C. Mao and Z. Shen, “A reinforcement learning framework for the adaptive
routing problem in stochastic time-dependent network,” Transp. Res. Part
C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 93, pp. 179–197, 2018.
[36] B. R. Kiran et al., “Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving:
A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 4909–4926,
Jun. 2022.
[37] M. van Otterlo, Reinforcement Learning: State-of-The-Art. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012.
[38] J. Kober, J. A. Bagnell, and J. Peters, “Reinforcement learning in robotics:
A survey,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1238–1274, 2013.
[39] R. S. Sutton et al. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning. Cambridge,
U.K: MIT Press, 1998.
[40] J. Zhang, H. Pei, X. J. Ban, and L. Li, “Analysis of cooperative driving
strategies at road network level with macroscopic fundamental diagram,”
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 135, 2022, Art. no. 103503.
[41] D. A. Lazar, S. Coogan, and R. Pedarsani, “Routing for traffic networks
with mixed autonomy,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 66, no. 6,
pp. 2664–2676, Jun. 2021.
[42] E. Bıyık, D. A. Lazar, D. Sadigh, and R. Pedarsani, “The green choice:
Learning and influencing human decisions on shared roads,” in Proc. IEEE
58th Conf. Decis. Control, 2019, pp. 347–354.
[43] Z. Chen, F. He, Y. Yin, and Y. Du, “Optimal design of autonomous vehicle
zones in transportation networks,” Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol., vol. 99,
pp. 44–61, 2017.
[44] G. Sharon, M. W. Levin, J. P. Hanna, T. Rambha, S. D. Boyles, and P. Stone,
“Network-wide adaptive tolling for connected and automated vehicles,”
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 84, pp. 142–157, 2017.
[45] H. Pei, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and S. Feng, “Optimal cooperative driving at
signal-free intersections with polynomial-time complexity,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 12908–12920, Aug. 2022.
[46] E. V. Denardo, Dynamic Programming: Models and Applications. New
York, NY, USA: Dover, 2003.
[47] M. Hessel et al., “Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 32th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018,
pp. 3215–3222.
[48] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” 2015, arXiv:1511.05952.
[49] H. Hasselt, “Double Q-learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2010, pp. 2613–2621.
[50] H. V. Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with double Q-learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016,
pp. 2094–2100.
[51] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. Freitas,
“Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016, pp. 1995–2003.
[52] M. Mehrabipour, L. Hajibabai, and A. Hajbabaie, “A decomposition
scheme for parallelization of system optimal dynamic traffic assignment
on urban networks with multiple origins and destinations,” Comput.-Aided
Civil Infrastructure Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 915–931, 2019.
[53] C. F. Daganzo, “The cell transmission model: A dynamic representation
of highway traffic consistent with the hydrodynamic theory,” Transp. Res.
Part B: Methodol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 269–287, 1994.
[54] H. Tarhini and D. R. Bish, “Routing strategies under demand uncertainty,”
Netw. Spatial Econ., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 665–685, 2016.
[55] A. Braylan, M. Hollenbeck, E. Meyerson, and R. Miikkulainen, “Frame
skip is a powerful parameter for learning to play Atari,” in Proc. 29th AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015, pp. 10–11.

437

[56] A. Srinivas, S. Sharma, and B. Ravindran, “Dynamic frame skip deep Q
network,” 2016, arXiv:1605.05365.

Huaxin Pei received the B.S. degree from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in
control science and engineering with the Department
of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
in 2023. His research interests include intelligent
system testing, autonomous driving, cooperative driving, and intelligent vehicle-infrastructure cooperative
systems.

Jiawei Zhang received the B.S. degree in 2020 from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, where he is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
Department of Automation. His research interests
include autonomous driving, intelligent vehicles, and
reinforcement learning.

Yi Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 1986 and 1988, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow,
U.K., in 1995. He is currently a Professor with the
Control Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. His current research interests focuses on intelligent transportation systems. His active research
interests include intelligent vehicle-infrastructure cooperative systems, analysis of urban transportation
systems, urban road network management, traffic data
fusion and dissemination, urban traffic control and management, advanced
control theory and applications, advanced detection and measurement, and
systems engineering.

Huile Xu received the B.S. degree from Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D.
degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2021. From 2019 to 2020, he was a Visiting Ph.D.
Student with the Division of Systems Engineering,
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, and the Center
for Information and Systems Engineering, Boston
University. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher
with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing,China. His research interests
include cooperative driving, intelligent vehicles, and
optimal control.

Li Li (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor with
the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, where he was involved in artificial
intelligence, intelligent control and sensing, intelligent transportation systems, and intelligent vehicles.
He has authored more than 170 SCI-indexed international journal papers and more than 50 international
conference papers as the first or corresponding author. Dr. Li was a Member of the Editorial Advisory
Board for Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, a Member of the Editorial Board of
Transport Reviews, and ACTA Automatica Sinica. He is also an Associate
Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 13:54:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

