2024 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality and Visualization

2024 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality and Visualization (AIVRV) | 979-8-3315-2874-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/AIVRV63595.2024.10859634

Safety-aware Path Planning for Post-disaster Rescue
Vehicles
Jingjing Liu, Zhen Zhang, Yibo Guo*, Tao Niu and Xiaoxiao Zhao
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
*
Corresponding author: ieybguo@zzu.edu.cn

To address the above challenges, this thesis proposes a
global path planning algorithm based on deep reinforcement
learning. On the basis of the DQN-based global path planning
algorithm, a path situation awareness module is added, and a
Transformer-based prediction algorithm is proposed to perceive
changes in road conditions and adjust the global path of
emergency rescue vehicles in real time to avoid congested paths
and risky paths, improve vehicle rescue efficiency, and ensure
driving safety.

Abstract. Emergency rescue vehicles play a vital role in dealing
with traffic accidents and emergencies. Emergency rescue vehicles
can reduce accident losses by arriving at the accident site in time.
Reasonable planning of emergency vehicle routes can shorten the
travel time of the route and improve the safety of the route.
However, due to the dynamic and changeable actual road network
environment and various uncertainties, congestion or accidents
may occur at any time, resulting in low rescue efficiency and high
risk of rescue routes. In response to the above problems, this thesis
proposes a global path planning algorithm based on deep
reinforcement learning. In response to complex and changeable
road conditions, this thesis adds a path situation awareness
module to the global path planning algorithm based on DQN, and
proposes a Transformer-based prediction algorithm to perceive
road condition changes, adjust the global path in real time, avoid
congested paths and risky paths, improve the rescue efficiency of
emergency rescue vehicles, and ensure driving safety. According
to different evaluation indicators, this thesis conducts simulation
experiments on the global path planning algorithm based on deep
reinforcement learning. The experimental results show that the
route travel time planned by the proposed algorithm is lower than
that of the benchmark algorithm, the safety is higher than that of
the benchmark algorithm, and the success rate of pathfinding has
improved by 14% compared to the baseline algorithms.
Keywords-Path planning;
Emergency rescue vehicle

Deep

reinforcement

Our main contributions are as follows:
1. A Transformer-based prediction algorithm is proposed to
perceive changes in road conditions in urban road networks and
predict the probability of congestion or risk on the path.
2. A global path planning algorithm framework based on
deep reinforcement learning is proposed to adjust the global
path of emergency rescue vehicles in real time, improve vehicle
rescue efficiency, and ensure driving safety.
3.The path travel time planned by the algorithm proposed in
this thesis is lower than that of the benchmark algorithm, the
safety is higher than that of the benchmark algorithm.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, path planning methods based on deep
reinforcement learning are introduced. In vehicle routing
planning, deep reinforcement learning methods can
continuously optimize route selection strategies through
interactive learning with the environment. This approach not
only handles static obstacles and fixed routes but also adapts to
dynamic changes such as traffic flow, weather conditions, and
unexpected events. Such problems are well-suited for deep
reinforcement learning, and deep reinforcement learning-based
routing methods are gradually becoming a research hotspot.
Their unique self-learning and adaptive capabilities provide
new ideas for solving complex routing problems.

learning;

I. INTRODUCTION
In urban road networks, traffic accidents occur suddenly.
Traffic accidents not only easily cause traffic congestion, but in
more serious cases may also cause casualties [1]. After an
accident occurs, the key to reducing accident losses is that
emergency rescue vehicles such as police cars, fire trucks, and
tow trucks arrive at the accident site in a timely manner to carry
out rescue work. Emergency rescue vehicle path planning is the
most critical part of emergency rescue work. Rescue vehicles
need to plan the safest and shortest path in a dynamic road
network environment. During emergency rescue, rapid
response rescue is very important. The best rescue path can
improve rescue efficiency, protect the lives of the people, and
reduce property losses [2].

Jin [3] et al. proposed a deep reinforcement learning
algorithm assisted by A∗ to address traffic congestion. This
algorithm transforms the global path planning problem for
vehicles into a Markov decision problem, achieving path
optimization in complex environments by maximizing total
rewards. Experiments show that this algorithm converges faster
and can more effectively handle dynamic and complex
environments. Chen [4] et al. introduce the transformer
architecture into neural networks and propose a new imitation
reinforcement learning framework to address the training
difficulties of policy neural networks after incorporating the
transformer structure. This approach aims to improve the
success rate of path planning. Wen [5] et al. proposed a

The actual road network environment is dynamic and
changeable, and there are various uncertainties. For example,
during peak hours, the traffic volume is large, and the urban
road network is prone to long-term congestion, which reduces
the rescue efficiency of rescue vehicles. In sharp turns or
relatively narrow roads, vehicles are prone to accidents when
driving on these roads, which is risky and unsafe. In these cases,
it is difficult to ensure that the rescue vehicles arrive safely at
the accident site before the rescue time limit.

979-8-3315-2874-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:06:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

co-evolutionary optimization algorithm to solve the problem of
low efficiency of emergency rescue. The algorithm reduces the
vehicle driving time and improves the stability of the vehicle
during driving. Cao [6] et al. proposed an attention-based deep
reinforcement learning method to solve the vehicle path
problem, and adjust the path in real time according to changes
in the surrounding environment. Astrid [7] et al. proposed a
reinforcement learning method based on model prediction to
plan paths and ensure that the intelligent agent can navigate to
the target location safely and without collision in different
environments.

The constraints are:

(

−
∩

≤

) +(

=∅

−

∩

) ≥

=∅

(2)

(3)

(4)

Among them, objective function 1 represents minimizing
the driving time of emergency rescue vehicles; formula 2
indicates that the operating driving time of emergency rescue
vehicles must be before the specified deadline; formula 3
indicates that a certain safety distance should be maintained
between emergency rescue vehicles and static obstacles in the
environment
; formula 4 indicates that emergency rescue
vehicles should avoid paths that may be risky and congested
during driving.

This paper proposes a global path planning algorithm based
on deep reinforcement learning, incorporating a path situation
awareness module within the DQN algorithm framework. A
prediction algorithm based on Transformer is introduced to
perceive future road conditions in real-time and dynamically
adjust the global path. This approach not only improves the
efficiency of vehicle rescue operations but also ensures the
safety of vehicles during their journey.
III.

(1)

DEFINITION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT

IV.
PATH S ITUATION AWARENESS
Due to the complex urban road network environment, road
conditions may change at any time. A previously unobstructed
path may become congested when a vehicle arrives, or risks and
emergencies may occur, causing emergency rescue vehicles to
have safety accidents during rescue missions. Therefore, this
section designs a Transformer-based prediction algorithm,
which predicts whether a path is congested or at risk based on
the environmental and resource characteristics of the path, and
adds nodes in congested or risky states to the congested node
set and risk node
set
, updates the road network node
status in real time, and adjusts the global path in real time.

This section defines and describes the problem of
emergency rescue vehicle path planning in the urban road
network environment.
Definition 1: Urban road network graph. The urban road
network graph in this thesis is a weighted directed graph
abstracted from the real road network =< , , >of the
city. is a set of nodes. In this thesis, the urban roads are
regarded
as vertices
( = 1,2, … , ) . Each node
represents a path, which represents the number of paths in the
road network. Each node has its own path feature attribute
= ( , , )is represented by a triple
information, which
of environmental features, operation features and resource
features.
= { , = → } is a directed edge set.
∈
represents the path length of the node . According to
whether the road network node is in a congested state or a risky
state, the nodes are divided into a safe passing node set
,a
congested node set
, and a risk node set
, that is =
{ , , }.

The specific process of the Transformer-based prediction
the
algorithm proposed in this chapter is as follows: First,
two types of features, environmental features
× 8 and
resource features, are merged through concat as the input of the
multi-head self-attention layer in the Transformer [8] module.
the
After passing through the encoder and decoder,
dimension feature matrix is extracted
, and the feature
matrix
is mapped to a × 2dimension vector through a
fully connected neural network with a convolution kernel of.
This vector represents the probability of the node being in a
congested state 2 × 8 and the probability of a risky state in the
future . Nodes whose congestion probability
and risk
probability are greater than a certain threshold are added to
the congested node set
and the risk node set
. The
Transformer-based prediction model framework is shown in
Figure 1 below.

According to the above definition, the path planning
problem of emergency rescue vehicles in the urban road
network environment is modeled as follows: When the
emergency rescue vehicle performs the rescue mission, there
are safe passing nodes
, congested nodes , and risk nodes
in the urban road network G. Given the accident point ,
under the premise of satisfying the time constraint T, space
constraint K and safety constraint C, a risk-free,
congestion-free, and collision-free optimal path
= <
, , . . . , , > is planned , keeping a certain safety distance
from obstacles , avoiding congested paths and risky paths
, and arriving at the accident point before the deadline to
carry out rescue work .To avoid congested paths and risky
paths while meeting safety constraints, minimize vehicle travel
time, improve vehicle operating efficiency, and ensure vehicle
safety during driving. The mathematical model is expressed as
follows:

V. GLOBAL PATH P LANNING METHOD BASED ON D EEP
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
This section designs a global path planning algorithm based
on deep reinforcement learning, which dynamically perceives
urban road information and predicts whether the path will be
congested or at risk. That is, it can judge future road condition
changes based on the current time and historical data
information, predict whether each path will be congested in the
future, adjust the path of emergency rescue vehicles in real time,

2
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:06:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

path nodes that may be at risk and congested are added to the
risk node set
and the congestion node set . The status of
all nodes in the road network is updated, and the DQN network
selects actions according to the state characteristics and
adjusts the global path of the emergency rescue vehicle in real
time. After executing the action, the agent obtains the reward
value and current state characteristics of the environment
feedback ′ , which are ( , , , ′ )stored in the experience pool.
The backbone network and target network of DQN respectively
obtain a batch of data from the experience pool for calculating
the loss function, and update the backbone network according
to the gradient of the error function. At regular intervals, the
network parameters of the backbone network are copied to the
target network.

minimize vehicle driving time, and improve the operating
efficiency of emergency rescue vehicles; at the same time, it
predicts paths may be at risk, and the vehicle tries to avoid paths
that may cause safety accidents during driving to ensure vehicle
driving safety.
The framework diagram of the global path planning
algorithm model based on deep reinforcement learning
constructed in this thesis is shown in Figure 1. First,
environmental features
and resource features are extracted
from the urban
road network graph G, and the extracted
features are input into the path situation awareness module. The
probability of risk and congestion states on the path is predicted
through the Transformer-based prediction algorithm, and the

Figure 1.

Global path planning algorithm framework based on deep reinforcement learning

learns effective strategies during training, exploration is
gradually reduced to 0.1 over subsequent training phases.

VI.
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
In order to compare and analyze the planning effect of the
global path planning algorithm in this thesis, the greedy
algorithm, DQN algorithm and PDQN proposed in this thesis
are selected for comparison.

B.

Evaluation indicators
In the context of vehicle global path planning, four metrics
are selected to evaluate the effectiveness of algorithms: vehicle
pathfinding success rate, safety, travel time, and reward
function.

A.

Experimental parameter settings
In this section, a two-dimensional grid map is constructed
using Python to represent the overall environment of the city
road network. The appropriateness of parameter settings
significantly affects the learning efficiency and update
performance
of
algorithms.
Consistent
parameter
configurations are employed across different algorithm
experiments in this study. The simulations are implemented
using Python 3.7, with algorithms realized using libraries such
as PyTorch, and experimental results plotted using the
Matplotlib library. During experiments, the experience replay
buffer is set with a maximum capacity of C=20000, and each
minibatch consists of 128 samples. The total number of training
iterations is 15000. Since the objective is to maximize total
rewards, a discount factor γ=0.99 is chosen to be as small as
possible. To ensure sufficient exploration in the initial stages of
training, ε-greedy exploration starts at ε=0.9. As the agent

(1) Vehicle route finding success rate. If the emergency
rescue vehicle does not collide with obstacles in the
environment from the starting point to the end point and
completes the route finding within the specified time, it means
that the planning result is successful. The success rate is the
proportion of the number of successful route finding of
emergency rescue vehicles in the total number. The higher the
success rate, the better the planning result.
The actual time used by
perform the operation is
time of the vehicle routing.

≤

(5)

the emergency rescue vehicle to
the specified latest completion

(2) Safety levels [9]. The sum of the deviations between any
trajectory segment and the nearest obstacle area. The smaller

3
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:06:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the value, the better the safety. The calculation formula is as
follows:

=

0,

=
,

>

≤

different scenarios, computing path safety levels. One hundred
sets of data are randomly sampled after convergence to
calculate the average path length and the average travel time of
vehicles from the starting point to the destination. Specific
experimental results are shown in Table 1 below.

(6)

Table 1 Evaluation indicators data of different algorithms in different
scenarios

(7)

Among them,
represents the deviation degree of the i-th
trajectory segment from the nearest obstacle area;
denotes
the minimum distance between the i-th trajectory segment and
the nearest obstacle area;
is the safety threshold between the
vehicle and the obstacle area.

Evaluation
indicators

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Scenario 3

Security
Path Lengths(m)
success rate
Driving Time(s)

32.2
20.6
71%
37

11.4
13.9
78%
34

0
11
84%
27

Greedy
Algorithm

Security
Path Lengths(m)
success rate
Driving Time(s)

57.9
47.6
50%
56

20.7
17.6
51%
45

0
13.4
65%
39

PDQN

Security
Path Lengths(m)
success rate
Driving Time(s)

4.5
24.8
85%
32

2.8
15.2
87%
24

0
10.9
91%
20

DQN

(3) Vehicle driving time. Driving time is the total time taken
by the emergency rescue vehicle to travel from the departure
area to the target area. The shorter the time, the higher the
operating efficiency of the emergency rescue vehicle.
(4) The reward function R. R is the total sum of rewards
provided by the environment. This metric indicates the total
rewards obtained by the agent during a training round. Faster
convergence of the reward function signifies stronger learning
capabilities of the algorithm.

(1) Algorithm convergence analysis
A comparative experiment was conducted between the
proposed method and the DQN algorithm. After 15,000 training
iterations, the average value was taken every 30 iterations. The
changes in reward values with the number of iterations in
different scenarios are shown in Figure 2 below.

C. Experimental results analysis
The paper calculates the success rates of different
algorithms in various scenarios. It conducts quantitative safety
analysis of the planning results of these three algorithms in

Figure 2 Comparison of rewards between PDQN and baseline algorithms in different scenarios

(2) Vehicle route finding success rate

In Scenario 1, the proposed algorithm begins to converge at
6000 episodes, while the DQN algorithm starts to converge at
9000 episodes. In Scenario 2, the proposed algorithm begins to
converge after 5400 episodes of training, whereas the DQN
algorithm starts to slowly converge after 9000 episodes of
training, with minor fluctuations in the later stages. In Scenario
3, the convergence speeds of both the proposed algorithm and
the DQN algorithm are similar, with both beginning to
converge at around 6000 episodes, and experiencing slight
fluctuations after convergence. In different environments, the
convergence speed of the proposed algorithm is generally faster
than that of the DQN algorithm. Additionally, the proposed
algorithm is more stable after convergence and achieves higher
reward values compared to the DQN algorithm. Therefore, the
proposed algorithm is suitable for vehicle global path planning
problems in various complex environments.

In Scenario 1, the success rate of the DQN algorithm is 71%,
the success rate of the greedy algorithm is only 50%, and the
success rate of the proposed algorithm is 85%, which is 14%
higher than that of the DQN algorithm and 35% higher than that
of the greedy algorithm. In Scenario 2, the success rate of the
DQN algorithm is 78%, the success rate of the greedy algorithm
is 51%, and the success rate of the proposed algorithm is 87%,
which is 9% higher than that of the DQN algorithm and 36%
higher than that of the greedy algorithm. In Scenario 3, the
success rate of the DQN algorithm is 84%, the success rate of
the greedy algorithm is 65%, and the success rate of the
proposed algorithm is 91%, which is 7% higher than that of the
DQN algorithm and 26% higher than that of the greedy
algorithm. In different scenarios, the success rate of the
proposed algorithm is higher than that of the baseline

4
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:06:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithms, demonstrating better
performance.

global path planning

REFERENCES
[1]

Ozbay K, Iyigun C, Baykal-Gursoy M, et al. Probabilistic programming
models for traffic incident management operations planning[J]. Annals of
Operations Research, 2013, 203: 389-406.
[2] Lv M, Zheng J, Tong Q, et al. Modeling and simulation of scheduling
medical materials using graph model for complex rescue[J]. Journal of
Information Processing Systems, 2017, 13(5): 1243-1258.
[3] Jin C, Wu Y, Li C. Vehicle-Road Collaborative Path Planning Based on
A∗ -assisted Deep Reinforcement Learning[C]. 2022 IEEE 25th
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC).
IEEE, 2022: 3010-3015.
[4] Chen L, Wang Y, Miao Z, et al. Transformer-based imitative
reinforcement learning for multi-robot path planning[J]. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2023.
[5] Wen H, Lin Y, Wu J B. Co-evolutionary optimization algorithm based on
the future traffic environment for emergency rescue path planning[J]. Ieee
Access, 2020, 8: 148125-148135.
[6] Cao Y, Hou T, Wang Y, et al. Ariadne: A reinforcement learning approach
using attention-based deep networks for exploration[C]. International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2023:
10219-10225.
[7] Vanneste A, Vanneste S, Vasseur O, et al. Safety aware autonomous path
planning using model predictive reinforcement learning for inland
waterways[C]. Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
Society. IEEE, 2022: 1-6.
[8] Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al. Attention is all you need[J].
Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017, 30.
[9] Wang X, Zhang G, Zhao J, et al. A modified membrane-inspired
algorithm based on particle swarm optimization for mobile robot path
planning[J]. 2015.
[10] Nickelson A, Tumer K, Smart W D. Contextual Multi-Objective Path
Planning[C]. International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 2023: 10240-10246.

(3) Safety Analysis
As shown in Table 1, in Scenarios 1 and 2, the safety of the
proposed algorithm is higher than that of the DQN algorithm
and the greedy algorithm. In Scenario 3, since there are no
obstacles, the safety score is 0, indicating that the path planned
by the proposed algorithm has the highest safety, while the path
planned by the greedy algorithm has the lowest safety. As
shown in Table 1, in Scenario 3, the path lengths planned by the
proposed algorithm and the DQN algorithm are similar. In
Scenarios 1 and 2, the path lengths planned by the DQN
algorithm are shorter than those planned by the proposed
algorithm. However, the paths planned by the proposed
algorithm in these two scenarios are safer than those planned by
the DQN algorithm. This is because the proposed algorithm
considers potential risks when planning paths, avoiding routes
that may pose risks, and trading off some path length to ensure
safe travel from the start point to the end point.
(4) Driving time
As shown in Table 1, the path lengths planned using the
proposed method are slightly longer than those planned by the
DQN algorithm. However, the travel times of the paths planned
by the proposed method are shorter than those planned by the
DQN algorithm and the greedy algorithm, with the greedy
algorithm resulting in the longest travel times. This is because
the proposed method considers future changes in road
conditions and adjusts the global path in real-time to avoid
congested areas.
Through the above four evaluation indicators, the proposed
method is compared with the DQN algorithm and the greedy
algorithm in different scenarios. The proposed algorithm
predicts the paths that may appear in risky and congested states
in the future road network, and the vehicle avoids these areas
during driving, ensuring the driving safety of the vehicle,
minimizing the driving time of the vehicle, and improving the
vehicle operation efficiency.
VII. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
This thesis models the path planning problem of emergency
rescue vehicles in urban road network environments , proposes
a global path planning algorithm based on deep reinforcement
learning , adds a path situation awareness module to the global
path planning algorithm based on DQN , and proposes a
Transformer-based prediction algorithm to perceive road
condition changes, adjust the global path in real time, avoid
congested paths and risky paths , improve the rescue efficiency
of emergency rescue vehicles , and ensure driving safety .
This thesis studies a single accident point, but in actual
environment, there may be multiple accident points. Our next
work will focus on the multi-objective path planning [10]
problem, which is more practical.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to tutors and classmates for their help.

5
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 04,2026 at 01:06:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

