2026 International Conference on Innovative Computing, Intelligent Communication and Smart Electrical Systems (ICSES) | 979-8-3195-4321-9/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICSES66558.2026.11478874

Dynamic Route Optimization using D* Lite and
DQN Algorithm
RNS Aneesh, Shyam Ganesh T, Vasanthi R
Computer Science and Engineering St. Joseph’s Institute of Technology Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Email id: rnsaneesh15@gmail.com, shyam.cse.2026@gmail.com, vasanthivinoth.me@gmail.com

Intelligent models that can learn adaptive navigation
patterns from experience have been introduced with
recent advances in Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL). Algorithms observed in the recent lectures
that Deep Q-Networks (DQN) have completely
revolutionized the world of autonomous navigation
and vehicle planning. The models are capable of
learning the best action value pairs and make
decisions that are context sensitive particularly when
the environment becomes a little crazy [3].

Abstract- Optimal path-finding in changing urban
environments is difficult due to variable traffic
congestion and sudden road closures. This paper
provides a hybrid intelligent reliable routing system
using the D* Lite algorithm and a Deep Q- Network
(DQN) for real-time adaptive path-finding. The D*
Lite portion guarantees global optimal path-finding
through incremental replanning, while the DQN agent
learns locality decisions based on traffic aware
congestion from past data. The proposed approach
provides a dynamic balance between deterministic
planning and learned adaptability for the purpose of
minimizing travel cost and travel delay.

The bad part though is that these algorithms do not
typically offer certain deterministic path optimality
and instead can actually break down in large networks
or very dynamic networks. This is the reason to have
this vexing disjunction between the solid,
deterministic route planning to ensure efficiency and
the adaptability learning-based approaches can
provide when the conditions on the road vary
dynamically.

Keywords—Dynamic route optimization, D* Lite, Deep
Q- Network, reinforcement learning, hybrid path
planning, intelligent transportation systems.

I.INTRODUCTION
The accelerating urbanization and ongoing rise in
vehicular population have resulted in extreme traffic
congestion, road obstructions, and intermittent travel
delay in contemporary cities. Effective and smart
routing optimization has thus emerged as a major
part in the development of intelligent transport
systems (ITS). Classic routing methods like A*
and Dijkstra’s algorithm are commonly used for
finding the shortest path; however, the algorithms
were designed to work under stationary conditions
and cannot respond to real-time changes in the
environment like congestion or accidents [1].

Designed a Pygame simulation platform to visualize
the routing process in real-time, and can simulate
congestion and blocks. The hybrid model reduces
travel time up to 20% and replanning time to 25, and
routes by the model are more stable than the methods
used before. This paper advances intelligent, adaptive
route optimization that trades between optimality,
flexibility and real-time decision-making, to the
future urban transportation system.
Integrate D*Lite and the Deep Q-Networks, which
provides a new approach to traffic-sensitive routing
which is adaptive to turnover in traffic. The hybrid
approach is a combination of deterministic and
adaptive learning, which results in efficient and
flexible paths. It is a step in the direction of
systems that are capable of automatically adapting to
real-world traffic changes and at the same time give
the best route.

To circumvent this drawback, incremental search
methods like D* Lite have been introduced to
quickly replan routes when the environment is
changing, by rebasing only the affected nodes rather
than recalculating the entire route [2]. Whereas D*
Lite minimizes computation overhead, it is still
reactive but not predictive because it does not take
into account past traffic experience or predict
dynamic patterns of congestion.

1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In this paper, the following sections have been
presented: Section 2 – Related Works, Section 3 –
Proposed Methodology, Section 4 – Results and
Discussions, and Section 5 – Conclusion.

fly route planning.
Subba Rao, P.V.R., and co-authors [4] subdivided an
adaptive DQN based city traffic control
methodology. The algorithm optimized the
intersection lights by continuously being informed
about live traffic data and reduced congestion
significantly. The research has shed light on the
strength of reinforcement learning in live urban
mobility that interested people in combining DQN
tricks with pathfinding to achieve a full-fledged
routing
enhancement.
To
investigate
the
computational footprint of Bidirectional A* and D*
Lite and their performance in changing worlds.

II.RELATED WORK
Recently, there have been numerous researches that
have been exploring the concept of dynamic route
optimization and intelligent navigation in relatively
uncertain environments. Most of the works combines
heuristic pathfinding with deep reinforcement
learning since it can be modified dynamically
without consuming excessive compute. This paper
will discuss some of the interesting papers and
demonstrate how the old- school algorithms are
becoming hybrid and learning-friendly systems.

Chadhurbala, R.V. et al. [5] conducted a comparison
of these algorithms. Their findings indicated that D*
lite provides the golden mean with regard to the
accuracy of the path and the speed of updates. This
assessment provides an additional analysis of the bidirectional search and supports the conceptualization
that incremental algorithms are more scaled in larger
networked systems.

The team led by Sarbini, R. [1] developed a
pathfinding model that combines A* and D* Lite in
order to enhance pathfinding in video games. Their
focus was to manage the moving obstacles and the
fast re-planning to ensure you are on the most
appropriate path to pursue as the things keep on
changing. Their findings highlighted the fact that D*
Lite executes repetitive calculations in a reduced way
than the simple A*, as a result it gains certain initial
experience of dynamic replanning that may be
applied to the real traffic situation.

In their research, Bhakti Yudho Suprapto et al. [6]
aimed to optimize route planning for autonomous
electric vehicles by applying the D* Lite algorithm.
Their implementation included factors based not only
on distance traveled, but also on energy
consumption, which expanded the algorithm from
just a pathfinding utility. The modification of multiobjective optimization contributed to other research
that was deliberating the efficiency and sustainability
of route planning as well.

Bagad, P. and associates [2] measured A* and D*
Lite in the environments where the routes are
continuously changing their positions. The study
discovered that A* provides with a good answer
when the world is not moving, but D* Lite is the
star when it uses its stored information when the
world goes inverted. The lesson learned was that D*
Lite updates are easier to perform and this prompted
the authors to consider hybrid models as an extension
to expedite decision-making by introducing an
element of learning.

Letian Xu et al. [7] introduced a reinforcement
learning- based autonomous navigation model for
unmanned vehicle systems. Their approach was to
allow unmanned vehicles to forecast and respond to
real-time changes in vehicle traffic patterns based on
continuous interactions with the environment. Their
application of sensor-based feedback reciprocity in
regard to rewards based decision making showed
substantial improvements in autonomous navigation
by documenting the benefits of combining learningbased (ML) control and deterministic path planning.

Koh, S. and team [3] concentrated on a real-time car
navigation system with the use of deep reinforcement
learning within the SUMO simulator. The agents
considered navigation as a process of choices and got
to know how to make traffic- aware calls. The study
concluded that a DQN is better than traditional
heuristics, particularly when the traffic patterns are
chaotic. The latter discovery gave rise to a flurry of
hybrid systems combining classical algorithms such
as D* Lite with learning models to optimize on-the-

Zixiang Wang et al. [8] investigated autonomous
robot navigation in uncertain terrains using
reinforcement learning models. Their model designed
robots to explore the environment without predefined
maps, allowing them to learn directly from the
environmental stimuli. Results demonstrated the
2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

flexibility and generalization power of reinforcement
learning, which may be useful for hybrid route
optimization architectures.

mentioned the shortcomings of static routing
techniques. The paper made the claim that the trend
was increasingly toward the use of adaptive and
hybrid routing systems for the real-time control of
transportation systems.

Mohamed Hussein Abo El-Ela et al. [9] presented a
hybrid optimization method for urban pathfinding
using deep learning and heuristic approaches. Their
model was based on merging neural learning with
heuristic approaches to help make adaptive path
decisions under varying constraints. The contribution
of their work is the successful coordination of
exploration and exploitation policies, which sets the
stage conceptually for combining DQN with the D*
Lite in the next section.

Das, Soumi, Kalava, Rajath Nandan, Kumar, Kolli
Kiran, Kandregula, Akhil, Suhaas, Kalpam,
Bhattacharya, Sourangshu, and Ganguly, Niloy [15]
proposed a new method for predicting travel time by
using a map-enhanced deep neural network model
together with road network data.
Collectively, these studies highlight a continuous
progression from deterministic path finding to
adaptive hybrid systems. Given what these studies
show, this paper proposes a hybrid D* Lite - DQN
model. This hybrid model will benefit from the
efficiency of incremental planning, in terms of
learning and efficiency, and the adaptive intelligence
of reinforcement learning for real-time dynamic route
optimization in complex urban networks.

Zhijian Huang et al. [10] proposed a modified DQN
algorithm for path planning of unmanned surface
vehicle (USV) applications. Their modifications
consisted of more refined reward functions, and
prioritized experience replay in order to promote
faster convergence and a higher accuracy route. The
paper showed that tuning reinforcement learning
parameters could increase stability and performance
under uncertainty.

III.PROPOSED METHODOLOGY

Xie, Kaili, Qiang, Jie, and Yang, Haitao [11]
presented an upgraded version of D* Lite algorithm
that optimized the node expansion and heuristic
evaluation in order to provide a safer path and faster
replanning in dynamic environments. The research
illustrated that one could always improve incremental
planners to keep a good balance between obstacle
clearance and computation time.

Conventional routing algorithms like A* and
Dijkstra’s algorithms mainly concentrate on finding
the shortest path between a pair of nodes based on
static network situation. Even though this works best
when things are stable, these algorithms don’t adjust
things when conditions change, e.g. congestion, road
closures, and accidents. While more sophisticated
methods like D* Lite can do incremental replanning,
but are still somewhat reactive and don’t have a prior
knowledge of traffic patterns. Hybrid D* Lite -DQN
routing
model
combines
the
graph-based
deterministic efficiency of planning with the adaptive
learning to reinforcement to generate congestionconscious, real-time optimal route suggestions. The
methodology guarantees:
 Effective and gradual replanning: Cashing in
on the D* Lite algorithm to update the only
relevant nodes and consequently lessening the
computational cost in case of dynamic changes
in traffic.
 Intelligent traffic learning: Deep Q -network
(DQN) is entrenched in the procedure,
holistically over epochs, and live congestion
cues, to compute where bottlenecks could be
found.
 Improved routing stability: Stable behaviour
may be assured through the choice of jointly

The dynamic weighting of Dijkstra’s method, which
integrates traffic prediction in the calculation of
edge costs for adaptive routing, has been suggested
by Udhan, Piyush, Ganeshkar, Akhilesh, Murugesan,
Poobigan, Permani, Abhishek Raj, Sanjeeva,
Sameep, and Deshpande, Parth [12].
Saravana Kumar, B., and Suyampulingam, A. [13]
made an evaluation of the reinforcement learning–
based path planning in a disaster environment
simulation with UAVs. The study found that in tests
with the dynamic conditions and the obstacles in
abundance, Q-learning was better than SARSA.
Thus, the error resilience of learning-based
navigation has been demonstrated once more.
Pratap, Suyash [14] conducted an extensive
investigation into dynamic rerouting methods in
multimodal transport networks and had also
3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

optimising policies local responsiveness and
global productivity.

movements and persistently learned from the rewards
via policy making. If the situation remains relatively
constant, the Output Layer will drive the route along
the path generated by D* Lite, However if congestion
or blockages are encountered, the DQN policy will
choose a better alternative path. The arrangement of
decisions from both modules allows the system to
adapt in real-time providing the shortest congestion
free route in changing environments.

Fig. 1 illustrates the suggested methodology, which
is segregated into four primary steps —
Environment, D*lite module, DQN Training Module,
and Output Layer .
The hybrid system is implemented in the Fig. 1
proposed for dynamic route optimization Hybrid D*
Lite–DQN. The D* Lite Module acts as a global
planner, computing an initial shortest path based on
geometric distances and constant edge weights. The
system is started with part being the Environment
Module where the street network is represented in
the form of a weighted graph and reads synthetic
traffic data via JSON inputs. These inputs define
edge costs based on congestion intensity and road
blockages.

Model Preparation
In order to replicate dynamic urban traffic conditions
like congestion, roadblocks, and fluctuating travel
costs, the model was created and trained in a
specially
created
Pygame-based
simulation
environment. Both local and global path planning
modules can be tested in real time and visualized
under controlled conditions in this environment.
 Model Input: Network Graph and traffic data
 Model Output: Shortest Uncongested path
3.1

The model is trained with D* lite and DQN Hybrid
framework to intelligently decide the fastest and
uncongested route to reach destination with high
accuracy and lower faults with its policy decision
maker.
D* Lite Module
To perform the global path planning, D* Lite
algorithm is used. The main feature of this algorithm
is the ability to practically and rapidly regenerate
routes in rapidly shifting settings by modificating
just the appropriate nodes rather than recalculating
the whole path. In reality, simulation of D*
adjusts the cost values instead of executing an
increment totally resets search like A* does within
response to design variabilities. As a result, it would
result in noticeably quicker computations with less
computational burden, making this arrangement
potential because it could achieve real-time adaptive
3.2

routing.
Algorithm 1 D* Lite Global Path Planning
1: Input: Graph G(V, E), Start node sstart, Goal
node sgoal

Fig. 1. Architecture Diagram for Dynamic Route
Optimization

2: Initialize: g(s) ← ∞ and rhs(s) ← ∞ for all s ∈
V
3: rhs(sgoal) ← 0
4: Insert sgoal into priority queue U with key
k(sgoal) = [h(sstart, sgoal), 0]
5: while U.topKey() < k(sstart) or rhs(sstart)
!= g(sstart) do

Helper for the DQN Training Module functions as
the local planner, where DQN agent learns to predict
less congested alternative routes using both traffic
patterns and feedbacks from the environment. The
agent is afforded with state inputs, recommends
4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6: u ← U.popTop()
7: if g(u) > rhs(u) then
8: g(u) ← rhs(u)
9: for all predecessors s of u do
10: rhs(s) ← mins′∈succ(s)(c(s, s′) + g(s′))
11:
Update U with new key if inconsistent
12: end for
13: else
14: g(u) ← ∞
15: for all predecessors s of u and u itself do
16:
Update rhs(s) and U as before
17: end for
18: end if
19: end while
20: Output: Optimal path P from sstart to sgoal

Furthermore, it combines global deterministic
planning and local learning-based adaptability
performance in optimal routes, enhancing not only
the reliability and real time and stability of the route
systems but also the performance of intelligent
systems. Therefore, model three is a reliable and
stable system for optimal planning within dynamic
environments.
Algorithm 2 Deep Q-Network (DQN) Local Path
Optimization
1: Initialize: Replay memory D, Q-network with
weights θ, target network θ− = θ
2: for episode = 1 to N do
3:
Initialize state s0
4:
for each step t do

,
t

DQN Module
An adaptive, local path optimization can be achieved
by using the Deep Q-Network (DQN) algorithm.
DQN learns optimal actions through experience
and reward feedback. It predicts and avoids
congested paths based on historical data, improving
travel times and informing real-time decisionmaking. DQN is well suited for dynamic and
unpredictable traffic situations with continuous
adaptation required.
3.3

5:

at =

6:
Execute at, observe reward rt and next state
st+1
7:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in D
8:
Sample random mini-batch from D
9:
Compute target yt = rt + γ maxa′ Q(st+1,
a′; θ−)
10: Perform gradient descent on loss:
11: L(θ) = E[ (yt − Q(st, at; θ))2 ]
12: Every C steps, update θ− ← θ
13: end for
14:end for
15:Output: Trained DQN policy π(s) = arg
maxa Q(s, a; θ)

Hybrid Module
This project’s Hybrid D* Lite + DQN Routing
Framework incorporates continuously global and
local path planning with perfect cooperation to attain
adaptive and productive route planning in dynamic
environments. While D* Lite constructs the ideal
initial route, DQN adjusts it, taking into account
local high traffic density or abrupt new obstacles.
This combination of the two approach types enables
integration with low recalculation and results in
quicker, non-congested paths with maximum global
path coherence and less additional computational
costs.
3.4

Algorithm 3 Hybrid D* Lite + DQN Routing
Framework
1: Input: Road network graph G, traffic data T ,
start sstart, goal sgoal
2: Initialize D* Lite planner and pre-trained DQN
agent
3: Compute global path Pg using D* Lite
4: for each segment (si, si+1) in Pg do
5: Observe local environment state St from traffic
data T
6: if obstacle or congestion detected near si then
7:
Use DQN to select optimal local action at
8:
Move to next node according to at
9:
Receive reward rt and update local state St+1
10: if global map change detected then
11:
Replan global path using D* Lite

Expected Outcome
The expected result of the hybrid D* Lite + DQN
framework should be an intelligent, adaptive routing
model for dynamic urban environments. The
anticipated model should generate typical optimal
routes at time(< 20%) and less congestion, while it
should re-route faster than the standard D* Lite
when′′it comes to re-planning. The integrated D* Lite
+ DQN framework ensures stability during a sudden
blockage or when traffic consistency changes,
enabling
stable
and
accurate
navigation.
3.5

5

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 A* Algorithm (Traditional Shortest Path)
 D* Lite Algorithm (Incremental Replanning)
 Deep Q-Network (Learning Based
Approach)

incremental update
12: end if
13: else
14: Follow D* Lite’s planned segment to si+1
15: end if
16: end for
17: Output: Optimized route with dynamic
adaptation to environment

IV.RESULTS

AND

Table II presents the results in comparison to the key
performance measures.
TABLE II COMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE RESULTS
Success
Path
Replanning
Algorithm
Rate
Optimality
Time (s)
(%)
A*
0.85
40
2.8
D* Lite
0.90
60
1.9
DQN
0.80
55
2.1
Hybrid D*
0.95
85
1.4
Lite + DQN

DISCUSSIONS

In an effort to achieve optimized real-time path
planning in a dynamic traffic setting, this study
developed the Hybrid D* Lite + DQN Routing
Framework. The aim was to obtain adaptive routing
with lesser computation time and enhanced routing
efficiency than those of the traditional A*, D* Lite,
and standalone DQN strategies. This section offers an
analysis of the routing framework’s quantitative and
qualitative performance, flexibility, and resilience to
different traffic patterns.

These findings, therefore, affirm that the suggested
hybrid model does:
 30% convergence and 25% reduced
replanning time over conventional methods,
hence essentially it is significantly faster.
 10–15% better path optimality compared to A*
and D* Lite algorithms, which is such a small
but definite jump in efficiency.
 0-85% success rate in dynamic environments
where there are multiple impediments, simply
indicates that it can deal with messiness in the
real world.
 Better adaptability and real-time stability
with combined learning and incremental
planning - so it becomes rock-solid as it is
changing.

Quantitative Results
The quantitative analysis primarily considers the
effectiveness, flexibility, and dependability of the
proposed hybrid routing model. Table I displays
the metrics that models are benchmarking on, which
are Convergence Speed, Path Optimality, Success
Rate and Replanning Time.
TABLE I KEY EVALUATION METRICS FOR
BENCHMARKING THE HYBRID ROUTING
FRAMEWORK
Metric
Convergence
Speed
Path
Optimality
Success Rate
Replanning
Time

Description
Number of episodes
required for stable policy
learning.
Ratio of obtained path
cost to optimal path cost.
Percentage of successful
path completions under
dynamic obstacles.
Average time to update
route after environment
change.

Observed
Outcome

Qualitative Results
The qualitative test measures the stability, scalability,
and ease of maintenance of the framework in realworld scenarios.

30% faster
0.95
achieved

Learning Curve: Fig. 2 The hybrid framework exhibits faster convergence (30% improvement) and
achieves 20−25% higher cumulative rewards after
100 episodes. This simply demonstrates how greater
policy stability, effective exploration, and the
increased adaptability in dynamic traffic situations
are achieved through a combination of the global
planning offered by D* Lite with the local decisionmaking offered by DQN.

85%
maintained
25%
reduced

Comparative Analysis
There is just one generic analysis kick-in within this
analysis, to ascertain how the suggested hybrid
routing structure actually works against the three base
algorithms that have been selected:

6

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Learning Curve: Cumulative Reward vs.
Episodes

Fig. 3. Path Optimality Comparison.

Path Optimality Ratio : In this part examining the
Path Optimality Ratio. In Fig. 3, the comparison of
A*, D* lite and DQN with the proposed Hybrid
model is broken down. The hybrid achieves a high
score of 0.95, exceeding A (0.85), D* lite (0.90) and
DQN (0.80). Essentially, it generates routes that are
approximately 10-15 percent near the optimal base
demonstrating improved exploration/exploitation
balance to select an efficient route in real-time.
Success Rate with Increasing Obstacles: Fig. 4
displays the success rate change with the addition of
increasing dynamic obstacles. The Hybrid D* Lite +
DQN model proposed remains about 100 % with
none of the obstacles and falls to 85 % with five
obstacles- performing much better than D* Lite (60
%), DQN (55 %) and A* (40 %). This proves that
the hybrid one is stronger and more flexible in the
conditions of dynamic traffic.
Discussion
The results struck a chord with us, our hybrid
framework is sound, it is hyper adaptive, and it is
extraordinarily efficient with regard to route
optimisation in circumstances of dynamic change.
Main take aways are:
 Improved Learning Efficiency: Achieved a
30% lower convergence rate and dragged
approximately a quarter to half as much
cumulative rewards as the vanilla DQN.
 Enhanced Path Optimality: Achieved a 0.95
optimality ratio, and beat A* (0.85), D* Lite
(0.90), and DQN (0.80) as indicated in Fig. 3
 Higher Success Rate:The model had a 85%
route completion rate despite 5 constantlychanging obstacles far more successful than the
peers as shown in Fig. 4.
 Reduced Replanning Overhead: Computation
time on a dynamic update was cut by 25%.

Fig. 4. Success Rates V/s Dynamic Obstacles
These findings demonstrate the brilliance of
combining D* Lite with DQN-traffic is smarter,
routes are quicker and more intelligent and avoids the
re-planning every time.

V.CONCLUSION
This study proposed a hybrid routing system a
combination of D* Lite and reinforcement learning
through Deep Q - networks so that the pathfinding
can adjust to the varying traffic in the city. The
fundamental concept contains that the hybrid
approach is capable of managing congestion and road
blockages during the course of permanently
replanning, as it gains knowledge of the most suitable
traffic-aware routes. The system also transcended to
higher success in the simulations it ran, converged
more quickly, and was more efficient than the older
algorithms. The entire process is successful as it
combines deterministic planning with learning-based
decision making to use in real-time optimization.
Future scopes includes scaling the model to larger
city networks, introduce multi-agent coordination of
vehicles distributed, and develop predictive traffic
analytics to make it more responsive and bring

7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[8].

overall higher performance.

REFERENCES
[1].

[2].

[3].

[4].

[5].

[6].

[7].

[9].

Riska Nurtantyo Sarbini, Irdam Ahmad, Romie Oktovianus
Bura, and Luhut Simbolon, ”Development of Pathfinding using
A-Star and D-Star Lite Algorithms in Video Game”, Journal of
Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, 2024.
Prathamesh Bagad, Prachi Dahatonde, Rushikesh Gagare and
Ishwari Athare, ”Optimizing Pathfinding in Dynamic Environments: A Comparative Study of A* and D-Lite Algorithms”
2024 IEEE Pune Section International Conference (PuneCon),
2024.
Songsang Koh, Bo Zhou, Hui Fang, Po Yang, Zaili Yang, Qiang
Yang, Lin Guan, and Zhigang Ji, ”Real-time deep reinforcement
learning based vehicle navigation”Applied Soft Computing,
Volume 96, 2020, 106694, ISSN 1568-4946, 2020.
P V RSubba Rao, Venkata Ramana Murthy Polisetty, K Krishna
Jayanth, N V Sai Manoj, Vankadari Mohith, R Prasanna Kumar
”Deep Adaptive Algorithms for Local Urban Traffic Control:
Deep Reinforcement Learning with DQN”, 2nd International
Conference on Intelligent Data Communication Technologies
and Internet of Things (IDCIoT-2024) 2024.
Chadhurbala R V, Naveen US, Nipun B V, Supriya.P , and
Suyampulingam A ”Comparative study of Bidirectional A*, D*
and D* Lite for Path Planning”, IEEE International Conference
on Electronics, Computing and Communication Technologies
(CONECCT) 2024.
Bhakti Yudho Suprapto, Suci Dwijayanti, Desi Windisari, and
Gatot Aria Pratama, ”Optimizing Route Planning for Autonomous Electric Vehicles Using the D-Star Lite Algorithm,”
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science
and Applications, Vol. 16, No. 1, 2025.
Letian Xu, Jiabei Liu, Haopeng Zhao, Tianyao Zheng,
Tongzhou Jiang, and Lipeng Liu, ”Autonomous Navigation of
Unmanned Vehicle Through Deep Reinforcement Learning,”
arXiv:2407.18962, 2024.

[10].

[11].
[12].

[13].

[14].
[15].

Zixiang Wang, Hao Yan, Yining Wang, Zhengjia Xu, Zhuoyue
Wang, and Zhizhong Wu ”Research on Autonomous Robots
Navigation
based
on
Reinforcement
Learning,”
arXiv:2407.02539, 2024.
Mohamed Hussein Abo El-Ela, Ali Hamdi, ”Adaptive Urban
Pathfinding Using Deep Learning and Heuristic Optimization, ”
Intelligent Methods, Systems, and Applications (IMSA), 2025.
Zhijian Huang, Huiqun Lin, and Guichen Zhang, ”The USV
Path Planning Based on an Improved DQN Algorithm, ” International Conference on Networking, Communications and
Information Technology (NetCIT), 2021.
Kaili Xie, Jie Qiang, and Haitao Yang, ”Research and Optimization of D-Start Lite Algorithm in Track Planning” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 161920-161928, 2020.
Piyush Udhan, Akhilesh Ganeshkar, Poobigan Murugesan, Abhishek Raj Permani, Sameep Sanjeeva, and Parth Deshpande,
”Vehicle Route Planning using Dynamically Weighted
Dijkstra’s
Algorithm
with
Traffic
Prediction,”
arXiv:2205.15190, 2022.
Saravana Kumar B, and Suyampulingam A, ”Comparative
evaluation of path planning algorithms in a simulated disaster
environment,” 2022 IEEE 2nd Mysore Sub Section International
Conference (MysuruCon), 2022.
Suyash Pratap, ”Transportation Transformed: A Comprehensive Review of Dynamic Rerouting in Multimodal Networks,”
arXiv:2312.14953, 2023.
Soumi Das, Rajath Nandan Kalava, Kolli Kiran Kumar, Akhil
Kandregula, Kalpam Suhaas, Sourangshu Bhattacharya, and
Niloy Ganguly, ”Map Enhanced Route Travel Time Prediction
using Deep Neural Networks,” arXiv:1911.02623, 2019.

8

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on June 06,2026 at 01:07:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

