2019 IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS)

Work-In-Progress: Leveraging the Selﬂess Driving
Model to Reduce Vehicular Network Congestion
Guangli Dai∗ , Pavan Kumar Paluri∗ , Thomas Carmichael∗ , Albert M. K. Cheng∗ , Risto Miikkulainen†
∗ Department

† Department

of Computer Science, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004, USA
of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA

Abstract—With increasing trafﬁc in urban areas, it is crucial to
examine strategies to reduce trafﬁc network congestion. Popular
navigation policies currently tend to select the fastest path
available for each vehicle. However, a top-down approach to
navigation, which considers the trafﬁc network as a whole, offers
several speedup possibilities. Minimizing the average travel time
of all vehicles in the network with respect to their separate travel
deadlines improves trafﬁc throughput. Because such a strategy
does not guarantee an optimal navigation route for individual
vehicles, we refer to it as a “selﬂess” policy and based on
this observation we propose the Selﬂess Trafﬁc Routing (STR)
model. Hence, we propose a test bed based on Simulation of
Urban MObility (SUMO) that can evaluate the performance of
a trafﬁc routing policy based on the average travel time of all
vehicle agents in a given trafﬁc grid. Continuously calculating
optimal actions for multiple agents in real-time is computationally
complex. We therefore introduce a value-based reinforcement
learning strategy to achieve the beneﬁts offered by a selﬂess trafﬁc
routing model. We explore how this approach can potentially
achieve an optimal balance between action quality and the realtime performance of each decision.

SDN is logically centralized and all ﬂows of packets are under
the control of the SDN controller(s). However, in the STR
policy, independent vehicles only share limited information
with the network, and some vehicles may not be applying the
policy at all.
Based on the STR model, we propose a test bed based on
Simulation of Urban MObility (SUMO) that can evaluate the
performance of a trafﬁc routing policy based on the average
travel time of all controlled vehicles.
Considering a realistic map is much more complicated
than grids with thousands of nodes and edges involved, the
conventional way in calculating the optimal routing policy
for dynamic trafﬁc becomes impractical due to the high
time complexity. Fortunately, the state of the trafﬁc is a
consequence of the previous state and the decisions made by
vehicles at the previous state. Using this relation, the problem
can be formulated as a typical Markov Decision Process
(MDP). Hence, reinforcement learning is an ideal candidate
to train autonomous agents for a heuristic online policy for
the STR model [9]. We introduce a pilot study that shows
deep Q-learning [10] is a promising approach to solve the
STR problem, and examine the trade off between quality and
real-time performance demands of a decision.
The contributions of this paper are:
• Presenting the STR model that aims to minimize the
average travel time of vehicles while guaranteeing their
individual travel deadlines.
• Proposing a test bed based on SUMO. The test bed
offers a uniform method to evaluate the performance of
both heuristic routing policies and reinforcement learning
applications in the STR model.
• Applying deep Q-learning to trafﬁc routing decisions.
Preliminary results show that a deep Q-network agent can
solve the trafﬁc routing problem in a small-scale map.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, trafﬁc congestion has become an increasing
concern in urban areas [1]. The introduction of autonomous
vehicles and widely used navigation apps present an opportunity to coordinate trafﬁc routing, reduce travel time of vehicles,
and attenuate trafﬁc in urban areas.
Calculating the fastest way to travel from one point to
another in a trafﬁc network with a given trafﬁc situation has
been well studied. [2] offers an ofﬂine optimal algorithm
while [3] proposes a more practical solution with lower time
complexity. However, such approaches may not be globally
optimal if we consider the travel times of all vehicles in
the network. Numerous vehicles selecting heavily congested
routes creates avoidable bottlenecks. Once the degree of trafﬁc
congestion of a certain road reaches a critical threshold, there
is a drastic slow down for all vehicles on the road and a higher
risk of accidents [4]. Hence, [5] proposes a solution which
reduces the overall congestion degree within the network. [5]
simpliﬁes the trafﬁc network into a grid, which is not suitable
for realistic trafﬁc maps.
In this paper, we propose a “selﬂess” model that minimizes
the average travel time of vehicles, while preserving individual
vehicle travel deadlines under a realistic graph-based map. We
refer to this model as the Selﬂess Trafﬁc Routing (STR) model.
This selﬂess model shares a lot of similarities with trafﬁc
routing in Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN) [6] [7] [8]. The

2576-3172/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/RTSS46320.2019.00061

II. T HE SELFLESS POLICY
First, we illustrate that a “selﬂess” policy does exist and
we give a detailed comparison between the selﬁsh and the
selﬂess policies with an example. Then we propose speciﬁc
assumptions and the goal for the STR model.
As shown in the map in Fig. 1(a), there are two routes from
point A to point B. Route 1, displayed in blue line, is shorter
while route 2, displayed in red line, is longer in distance.
Here we assume the vehicle set Γ starting from A heading to
B sequentially contains 230 vehicles. This simulates the rush

548

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM. Downloaded on July 26,2020 at 11:58:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 

 &





 '

    !

+%%

  

*%%
)%%
(%%
'%%
&%%
%
%

(%

+%

-%

 
!       

!    

&'%

&*%

&,%

'&%

   
   

      '(%
   " !



&)%
&(*
&(%
&'*
&'%
&&*
&&%

 
  
 
 
!         
   

Fig. 1. An example showing the difference between a selﬁsh policy and a selﬂess policy.

hour of the urban trafﬁc. All vehicles in Γ employ the same
policy in each experiment. We conduct two experiments. One
applies the selﬁsh policy while the other applies the selﬂess
policy.
Under the selﬁsh policy, each vehicle tends to choose the
fastest route for itself. Under the selﬂess policy, each vehicle
chooses its route not only to satisfy its own travel deadline
but also to reduce the average travel time of all vehicles.
In Fig. 1(b), the index of each vehicle is given based on
the order of its arrival. Vehicles with smaller indices arrive
earlier than the ones with higher indices. Under the selﬁsh
policy, vehicles tend to choose route 1 ﬁrst because route 1 is
faster then. When more vehicles choose route 1, the following
vehicles start taking route 2, which is faster now and this later
causes similar congestion on route 2 as well. This is why
two spikes can be observed on the travel time curve for the
selﬁsh policy. It is worth mentioning that since route 1 yields
to route 2, vehicles that ﬁrst choose route 1 have to wait longer
at junction C in Fig. 1(a) than they used to estimate due to
the unexpected heavy trafﬁc on route 2.
The condition under the selﬂess policy is completely different. Vehicles controlled by the selﬂess policy split themselves
on routes 1 and 2 even before the congestion happens. Though
some vehicles have to spend more travel time compared to
other vehicles that set off at a similar time, potential trafﬁc
bottlenecks are averted. Considering each vehicle has its own
deadline, vehicles with relatively larger deadlines can afford
spending more time on the road without any compromise
to their respective deadlines. Such diversions reduce both
congestion and average travel time.
As shown in Fig. 1(c), the average travel time of all vehicles
in Γ reduces by 11% under the selﬂess policy compared
to that under the selﬁsh policy. This example shows how a
selﬂess policy can reduce the average travel time and relieve
urban congestion. Since only a few choices can be made in
a small map such as 1(a), the decrease in the average travel
time of up to 10% is signiﬁcant. In a larger map with more
alternative routes, the selﬂess policy may have additional ways
to manage trafﬁc ﬂow. Vehicles with later deadlines can make
slight diversions to lower the average travel time of all vehicles
in the network. With more routing choices available on a larger
map, the worst-case diversion time can be further reduced.
With the introduction of a selﬂess routing policy, we next

examine the assumptions and the goal of the STR model. The
constraints are as follows: 1) Each agent applying the policy
can control only one vehicle while such agent can only have
limited access to other agents’ locations. For instance, certain
agent can only know where another agent-controlled vehicle
is. However, it does not know where it will be heading to or
any other sensitive information about that vehicle whatsoever.
2) While routing the vehicles, an agent must guarantee the
travel deadline of its own vehicle and consider this as its topmost priority. The goal to be achieved under these constraints
is to minimize the average travel time of all agent-controlled
vehicles in the trafﬁc network.
III. A SUMO- BASED TEST BED
There are numerous potential solutions towards the STR
problem introduced above. To validate their performances, we
need a test bed to compare different policies. In this section,
we introduce a test bed built based on platform Simulation of
Urban MObility (SUMO) [11]. We also show the details on
how agents control the vehicle in the testing environment.
A. Simulation platform
In Simulation of Urban MObility (SUMO) [11], all sorts of
vehicle behaviors are taken into consideration. For instance,
vehicles yielding, merging and trafﬁc lights are all considered
in this simulation. These characteristics make the simulation
more realistic and the results look more convincing. In the map
exported from [12], there are directional lanes and different
types of junctions speciﬁed. The type of vehicles that can
access a given road is also speciﬁed in the map. Hence, the
vehicles’ type can affect the ﬁnal outcome as well.
During tests, vehicles have a start point, a travel start time,
a destination, a vehicle type, and a travel deadline speciﬁed
by the user. For testing purposes, the travel deadlines can be
set as inﬁnite. Disregarding deadlines allows for computing
the travel time of each vehicle independent of its deadline.
This approach is analogous to examining the tardiness of a
soft real-time task in a real-time system.
B. The control of vehicles in the system
During one simulation in the test bed, there can be more
than one agent each controlling a separate vehicle. The agent
only controls the direction the vehicle is heading to at each

549

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM. Downloaded on July 26,2020 at 11:58:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.







sequence. Each agent controls one vehicle which we refer to
as the target vehicle. The target vehicle will strictly follow the
instructions given by the agent to travel in the system.
For this pilot research, we simplify the problem with two
assumptions. First, the travel deadline of the vehicle controlled
is inﬁnite. Second, the start and destination points are ﬁxed
within the given map. The trafﬁc ﬂow of vehicles not controlled by the agent and the start time of all vehicles are
randomly generated.
In our training process, we used 1000 episodes. In each
episode, the agent makes decisions, which we refer to as
“action”, based on the “state” offered. As a feedback, the
environment built on SUMO returns a “reward” corresponding
to the action made under the state. State refers to a vector
that contains information such as the vehicles’ location and
the congestion ratio (CR) of each edge. Reward refers to
some integer value. The action is an integer between 0 and
5, representing the choice at a junction correspondingly.
We now introduce the process of the training of the Qnetwork agent, which is shown in Fig. 3. At the beginning,
SUMO is initialized and the agent makes a decision on the
action based on the initial state. If the action is invalid, a
negative reward, which is a penalty, is given. Otherwise, we
simulate the action in SUMO. A huge positive reward is given
if the vehicle controlled by the agent reaches the destination.
If the agent does not reach the destination, the reward becomes
a −1 penalty for each second the vehicle spent since the last
decision. Negative penalties for sub-optimal route selection
inspire the agent to reduce the travel time. The rewards are
used to update the Q-network and the agent makes the next
decision according to the given state. Yet if the action is
invalid, the target reaches the destination, or the episode
exceeds the time limits, the Q-network will be updated and
the episode ends. Such episode repeats itself for 1000 times
before the training ends.



Fig. 2. An example of decision making.

junction while the speed control, lane switching and trafﬁc
light recognition are not discussed and all handled by the
test bed in a conventional way. It is worth mentioning that
agents can communicate limited information (like each other’s
location) between each other assuming they lie on the same
centralized system.
Once the vehicle sets off, the agent that controls the vehicle
will make a decision on which way the vehicle should head
to at the next junction. For instance, in Fig. 2, for a vehicle
moving from left to right, when the vehicle reaches point
A, it has to make a decision for the upcoming junction at
point B. Suppose it chooses to go straight. Once it reaches
point C, which is the beginning of the next edge, it has
to make a decision for next junction at point D. At each
junction, the agent has at most six options: straight, slightly
left, left, turnaround, right, slightly right. Some options may
be unavailable at certain junctions. For instance, turning left
is unavailable at point B as shown in Fig. 2.
Our test bed can evaluate the performance of a trafﬁc routing
policy with the following parameters:
• The number of vehicles controlled by the agent together
with their vehicle types, start points, the travel start time,
destinations and the travel deadlines.
• The trafﬁc ﬂow that is not controlled by agents will be
randomly generated; the parameter of how heavy this
random trafﬁc ﬂow is, should be provided as an input.
• The map selected for testing.
• The policy each agent adopts. In the test, we assume all
agents adopt the same policy.
IV. A PPLYING Q- LEARNING TO THE S ELFLESS T RAFFIC
ROUTING (STR) PROBLEM

B. The training result
During the training, the Q-network agent’s performance
converges. As shown in Fig. 4, the rewards that the agent receives starts with a low value, e.g., −10000, because the initial
actions of untrained agents exploring often select unavailable
turns. After around 200 episodes, the Q-network agent learns
the map well and begins to gain high rewards. The convergence
indicates a deep Q-network agent can learn a small-scale map
without much prior information.
Next we change the architecture of the Deep Neural Network (DNN) in the deep Q-network and discuss the inﬂuence
of the NN architecture on the performance under the SUMObased test bed introduced in Section III. As shown in Fig. 5,
the average travel time reduces when the DNN becomes more
complicated while the processing time to obtain each decision
increases. This suggests that a dynamic trade-off between the
quality of the decision and the calculation time needed can be
made under different scenarios.

We now discuss the application of deep Q-learning to the
STR model. Unlike the selﬁsh trafﬁc routing problem, which
has been well studied [2], [3], the optimal solution to the STR
problem requires the collaboration of multiple agents. This
greatly increases the time complexity in the application of
conventional trafﬁc routing algorithms. On the other hand, the
problem itself is a Markov Decision Progress (MDP). This
makes reinforcement learning a potentially useful tool [13].
In this section, we introduce our strategy to apply Q-Learning
to the STR model and establish preliminary results.
A. Deep Q-network agent training
Q learning [9], which is proved to be good at playing various
interactive games [10], [14], also ﬁnds its application in the
STR model. We introduce the training of a deep Q-network
agent based on the interaction of vehicles with SUMO as
stated above. During the training phase agents are trained in

550

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM. Downloaded on July 26,2020 at 11:58:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.



Fig. 3. The ﬂow chart of the training of Q-network agent

for realistic emulation of trafﬁc routing use cases. We have
just begun exploring the possible ways to shape the quality
of an agent’s action in the STR model. There are numerous
ways to design the reward function and we are testing various
approaches to evaluate the quality of an agent’s action in real
time. One exciting idea is the inclusion of congestion based
thresholds for rewards. Real-world trafﬁc ﬂow has critical
thresholds [4], and discrete rewards for staying under these
thresholds can help reduce travel times.











  

 



 


Fig. 4. The rewards the Q-network agent gains under different episodes of
the training..
     
+##

#)%

*##

#)

)##

#(+

(##

#()

'##

#('

&##

#(%

%##

#(

$##
#

#'+

     
 
  

R EFERENCES

        $''    
  
      

       
 

 
#)'

[1] G. Duczynski, “Investigating trafﬁc congestion: Targeting technological
and social interdependencies through general morphological analysis,”
2018.
[2] Y. Singh, S. Sharma, R. Sutton, and D. Hatton, “Optimal path planning
of an unmanned surface vehicle in a real-time marine environment using
a dijkstra algorithm,” in Marine Navigation. CRC Press, 2017, pp. 399–
402.
[3] J. Fawcett and P. Robinson, “Adaptive routing for road trafﬁc,” IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 46–53, 2000.
[4] D. Xu, B. Mao, Y. Rong, and W. Wei, “Theory and simulation for trafﬁc
characteristics on the highway with a slowdown section,” Computational
intelligence and neuroscience, vol. 2015, p. 53, 2015.
[5] I. Lamouik, A. Yahyaouy, and M. A. Sabri, “Deep neural network
dynamic trafﬁc routing system for vehicles,” in 2018 International
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Computer Vision (ISCV), Apr
2018, p. 14.
[6] M. N. M. R. Kannan Anusha, Sumathi Vijayan, “Adaptive routing
mechanism in sdn to limit congestion,” in Information Systems Design
and Intelligent Applications. Springer, 2018, pp. 245–253.
[7] L. Davoli, L. Veltri, P. L. Ventre, G. Siracusano, and S. Salsano, “Trafﬁc
engineering with segment routing: Sdn-based architectural design and
open source implementation,” in 2015 Fourth European Workshop on
Software Deﬁned Networks. IEEE, 2015, pp. 111–112.
[8] C. Filsﬁls, N. K. Nainar, C. Pignataro, J. C. Cardona, and P. Francois,
“The segment routing architecture,” in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[9] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine learning, vol. 8, no.
3-4, pp. 279–292, 1992.
[10] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[11] D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker, “Recent development and applications of SUMO - Simulation of Urban MObility,”
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements,
vol. 5, no. 3&4, pp. 128–138, December 2012.
[12] M. Haklay and P. Weber, “Openstreetmap: User-generated street maps,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 12–18, 2008.
[13] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
and et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, p. 529533, Feb 2015.
[14] J. DeNero and D. Klein, “Teaching introductory artiﬁcial intelligence
with pac-man,” in First AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2010.

Fig. 5. The comparison of execution time and average travel time between
agents with the simpliﬁed and complicated DNN.

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS
In this paper, we propose the STR model and explain how a
selﬂess policy can reduce the average travel time compared to
the selﬁsh policy. With the STR model speciﬁed, we propose
a SUMO-based test bed that can evaluate the performance of
various policies based on the criterion of average travel time.
Considering the challenges involved in the STR model, we
propose the idea of applying deep Q-learning technique to
the STR model. Our pilot study shows that a deep Q-network
agent can solve the STR problem in a graph-based map.
In future works, the speciﬁc interface of the SUMO-based
testing environment should be provided to ensure the results
are reproducible. Additional criteria such as the real-time performance of each decision should be measured in the testing
environment as well. The development of heuristic algorithms
on the STR model requires further exploration. Regarding
the Q-network agent training, the training currently involves
one vehicle without their individual deadlines considered. In
future works, multi-agent models should be explored with the
deadline of each vehicle as a part of the input. Furthermore,
randomly-generated start and destination points are necessary

551

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM. Downloaded on July 26,2020 at 11:58:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

