Personalized and Context-aware Route Planning
for Edge-assisted Vehicles
Dinesh Cyril Selvaraj∗ , Falko Dressler† , Carla Fabiana Chiasserini∗
∗ CARS@Polito,

arXiv:2407.17980v1 [cs.AI] 25 Jul 2024

† School

Politecnico di Torino, Italy
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Germany

Abstract—Conventional route planning services typically offer
the same routes to all drivers, focusing primarily on a few
standardized factors such as travel distance or time, overlooking
individual driver preferences. With the inception of autonomous
vehicles expected in the coming years, where vehicles will rely
on routes decided by such planners, there arises a need to
incorporate the specific preferences of each driver, ensuring personalized navigation experiences. In this work, we propose a novel
approach based on graph neural networks (GNNs) and deep
reinforcement learning (DRL), aimed at customizing routes to suit
individual preferences. By analyzing the historical trajectories of
individual drivers, we classify their driving behavior and associate it with relevant road attributes as indicators of driver preferences. The GNN is capable of representing the road network
as graph-structured data effectively, while DRL is capable of
making decisions utilizing reward mechanisms to optimize route
selection with factors such as travel costs, congestion level, and
driver satisfaction. We evaluate our proposed GNN-based DRL
framework using a real-world road network and demonstrate its
ability to accommodate driver preferences, offering a range of
route options tailored to individual drivers. The results indicate
that our framework can select routes that accommodate driver’s
preferences with up to a 17% improvement compared to a generic
route planner, and reduce the travel time by 33% (afternoon) and
46% (evening) relatively to the shortest distance-based approach.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Over the past few decades, the number of people migrating
to urban areas has been on the rise, reaching now more than
half of the world population and expected to double by 2050
[1]. To address the challenges posed by rapid urbanization,
cities are employing technological solutions across multiple
domains to ensure their effective operation. The adoption of
technological solutions in the transport domain is collectively
referred to as intelligent transportation systems (ITS). Cooperative ITS solutions [2], in particular, are becoming mainstream,
with a focus on sharing information with other vehicles and
road infrastructures to enable advanced vehicular applications.
Specifically, such cooperative solutions foster the development
of data-driven models wherein a driver can make informed
decisions based on real-time traffic data to enhance road safety,
traffic efficiency, and driving experiences [3, 4, 5].
Vehicle route planning is one such application that can
benefit from utilizing information shared between vehicles and
road infrastructures [6, 7]. Effective route planning can improve people’s lifestyles as they spend a substantial amount of
time commuting, and also impact significantly relevant factors
like people’s health, air quality, and fuel consumption [8, 9].

In addition to traffic efficiency, it is crucial to incorporate
user preferences to enhance the driving experience – creating
next generation cyber-physical social systems (CPSS) [10].
Current routing service providers often lack personalized route
planning options apart from generic options like toll avoidance, highlighting the need for facing this challenge. Previous
approaches proposed in the literature typically leverage only
historical driving data [11], or focus on identifying risk factors
associated with specific road segments [12] such as areas with
potential criminal activities [13].
Unlike existing works, to effectively address personalized
route planning, we propose a robust, context-aware route
planner that considers both traffic-related information and
driver preferences to determine customized route for the driver.
We employ a novel framework that combines two machine
learning paradigms: GNN to represent the road network as
graph-structured data, and DRL for its decision-making capabilities in highly dynamic environments. The integration of
these approaches fosters the development of a framework that
can make informed decisions accounting for dynamic trafficrelated information and individual preferences. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to combine GNNs with DRL
to address personalized and context-aware route planning systems. We evaluate the performance of the proposed framework
using a realistic road traffic network [14] through the opensource traffic simulator SUMO [15].
Our main contributions are thus as follows:
(i) We present a novel framework that integrates GNNs
with DRL, leveraging real-time traffic information of
the road network represented as graph-structured data.
With the help of carefully curated reward components,
the framework is capable of providing tailored and timeefficient routes for drivers.
(ii) We determine drivers’ preferences by analyzing their
driving behavior. In particular, we classify drivers’ behavior into aggressive and normal based on historical
driving data. Subsequently, we identify individual drivers’
preferences that correspond to specific road attributes
observed during normal driving behavior.
(iii) We introduce a flexible training approach to handle
various driving preferences where a generic model is
trained considering the generic traffic routing options.
Subsequently, multiple models are trained on this generic
model, each tailored to specific driving preferences, incorporating driver’s satisfaction rewards to provide person-

alized routes. This also allows our framework to accommodate the multiple variations of evolving driver’s preferences. Experimental results reveal that models trained
to prioritize driver’s preferences can achieve up to a
17% improvement in selecting routes preferred by drivers
when compared to the generic model, while reducing
the travel time by up to 46% relatively to the shortest
distance-based approach.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Vehicle route planning is a widely explored topic, and
numerous methodologies have been proposed to determine
efficient routes to reach a destination considering multiple
factors, including travel time, distance, fuel consumption,
charging time of EV, and environmental impact [16, 17, 18, 7].
Early route optimization systems utilized k-shortest path (kSP)
algorithms [19], primarily relying on static features like
travel distance and employing Dijkstra’s algorithm [20] or
the Bellman-Ford algorithm [21] to determine the shortest
path. However, the shortest path in terms of distance does not
necessarily equate to the fastest route due to dynamic factors
like traffic congestion and road conditions.
Recent technological advancements and the integration of
real-time data have led to the development of new methodologies, particularly variants of kSP algorithms [18], accounting
for dynamic factors such as travel time, alternative vehicle
routes, and real-time traffic conditions. Furthermore, optimal
velocity profiles have been proposed for vehicles to align with
traffic flow and traffic light management strategies to mitigate
frequent braking [22, 23]. These methodologies, however, often prioritize factors like travel time and distance, overlooking
human preferences, whereas few studies [24, 25, 11] account
for human preferences in route optimization tailored to drivers’
preferences.
Few studies [25, 12] leveraged crowdsourced data for
route planning: Quercia et al. [25] suggested routes based
on noise level and scenic views, while Abdelrahman et al.
[12] accounted for road quality and individual preferences. Li
et al. [24] utilized drivers’ historical data to identify frequently
traveled routes and make suggestions that incorporate familiar
landmarks along the path while minimizing the number of
route segments through dynamic programming techniques.
Similarly, Dai et al. [11] proposed taxi route planning based
on historical driver data, prioritizing travel time and fuel
efficiency, while de Souza et al. [13] prioritized safe areas
using historical crime data along with sporadic traffic reports for travel time estimation. However, neither of these
approaches utilized real-time traffic information, which could
lead to inaccurate travel time estimation, particularly in nonrecurring traffic situations. Similarly, Schoenberg and Dressler
[7] tackled route optimization for EV charging. One major
disadvantage of the proposed approaches is their inability to
provide routes in near real-time manner, as it takes time to
identify the solutions using Pareto front-based optimization
techniques. The computation time comparison taken by reinforcement learning (RL)-based route recommendation systems

with respect to Pareto optimal algorithms highlights that RLbased systems take negligible time to suggest routes compared
to other approaches [16].
There are a few studies utilizing RL to find a suitable
path between the source and destinations based on different
factors, which are represented as rewards [16, 26, 27, 28].
Sarker et al. [16] proposed a methodology to find a suitable
path considering fuel consumption, travel time, air quality,
travel distance as rewards and further allow for tuning the
reward components according to human preferences. A Qlearning based algorithm for finding the shortest path in a gridbased environment is employed in [26], which is less intricate
than real-world networks used for framework validation. In
contrast to such methodology using graph-structured data to
represent states, our approach can address generic, possibly
more complex, scenarios.
Graph-structured data indeed facilitate efficient information
exchange between nodes and maintaining up-to-date information on all available paths and their corresponding traffic
conditions. Although GNN and RL techniques are utilized
in [27, 28], these solutions primarily focus on the traveling
salesman problem with an assumption of relatively stable
traffic conditions. However, the vehicle route planning presents
an additional challenge which aims to identify the optimal
route between source and destination considering highly dynamic factors. We address such vehicle routing problem by
considering factors such as travel time, congestion level,
and driver satisfaction, employing both GNN and DRL. By
utilizing such a framework, real-time traffic information is
effectively integrated into the graph structure, enabling the
provision of near real-time routing solutions compared to
traditional algorithms.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this work, we integrated graph neural networks and reinforcement learning to harness the advantages of representing
road networks as graph-structured data and to leverage the
decision-making capabilities of RL in providing a scalable and
time-efficient personalized route planner. GNNs play a role in
encoding road network-related information as graph structures,
effectively capturing relationships and dependencies between
nodes. They capture both local and global information by
passing messages between neighboring nodes. In the context
of the road network, nodes represent intersections and edges
represent road connections between nodes, each associated
with features to effectively represent the road network for the
route planner task at hand. The reinforcement learning agent
considers such graph-structured data representing the road
network attributes as environment states to make decisions
based on the graph-structured data using the GNN-based DRL
policy network.
A. Graph neural networks
A graph neural network is a type of neural network that
deals with graph-structured data. Graph-structured data contains a set of entities represented as nodes, and connections be-

tween them are represented as edges, making them suitable for
representing complex relationships that capture dependencies
and interactions between nodes. Such representation of data as
graphs has gained significant attention in recent years due to its
effectiveness in various domains [29], such as recommendation
systems, social networks, and molecular biology. GNNs can
be applied to various tasks: node-level classification within a
graph, edge-level prediction to identify if two nodes share an
edge, and graph-level prediction to predict the property of an
entire graph. In this work, we utilize the graph-level task to
predict the global representation of the entire graph.
The core operation of the GNN is the message passing
process that takes place between nodes and their neighbors.
At each iteration, each node receives information from its
neighbors’ feature vectors and aggregate the messages received
from its neighbors. The message passing and aggregation
operation can be defined as
X
(l)
(l)
(l)
M (hi , hj , eij )
mi =
(1)
j∈N (i)

where M (·) represents the neural network as a function
(l)
(l)
approximator, hi , hj represent the features vectors of nodes
i and j (resp.) at iteration l, N (i) represents the set of
neighboring nodes of node i, and eij represents the features
of the edge between nodes i and j. Later, each node updates
its feature vector based on the aggregated messages and its
own previous feature vector using the approximated function
approximator.
After repeating the message passing process for a certain
number of iterations, a readout function is employed to
aggregate all final node representations into a graph-level
representation as the output. The output of the readout function
can be utilized for the downstream tasks such as graph
classification/regression.
In this work, we make use of the graph isomorphism
network with edge features (GIN-E) [30] architecture, which
is a variant of the Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) [31]. It
extends the GIN model by incorporating edge features into the
graph representation. The main advantage of using the GIN-E
variant is the capability to associate both node features and
edge features when updating node representations during the
message passing process. Such variation is crucial for the use
case discussed in this work, as the edge features play a vital
role in determining the available routing options.
B. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning is a type of machine learning
paradigm wherein an RL agent iteratively interacts with the
environment, taking action and receiving feedback in the
form of reward. This interaction is typically formalized as
a discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP), denoted as
a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ), representing the state space, action
space, state transition probability, reward, and discount factor,
respectively. Moreover, the agent’s policy π represents its
decision-making strategy aimed at optimizing the expected
discounted reward.

Q-learning [32] is an RL algorithm designed to find the
optimal policy π, given the Markov decision process. The
idea behind the Q-Learning is to iteratively interact with the
environment to learn the optimal action-value function Q(s, a)
representing the expected cumulative future rewards by taking
action a in state s assuming the agent follows the current
policy π thereafter. During the learning process, the actionvalue function Q(s, a) is updated using the Bellman equation
Q(s, a) ←− Q(s, a) + α(r(s, a)+
γ max
Q(s′ , a′ ) − Q(s, a))
′

(2)

a

where Q(s, a) represents the current Q-value for state s and
action a, α represents the learning rate, r(s, a) represents the
immediate reward after taking action a in state s, s′ represents
the resulting state after taking action a, and a′ indicates the
possible actions to take in the resulting state s′ .
As the basic Q-Learning algorithm encounters difficulties
in learning an optimal policy with high-dimensional state and
action spaces, DRL employs a deep neural network as function
approximator, enabling it to manage complex decision-making
tasks. In this study, the deep neural network adaptation of
the Q-Learning algorithm, the deep Q-network (DQN) [33], is
used to learn the optimal policy.
IV. P ERSONALIZED AND C ONTEXT- AWARE ROUTE
P LANNING
In this section, we present our framework for personalized
and context-aware route planning. To achieve the desired
outcome, we have to address two key questions: (1) how to
determine the desired path for the given driver, and (2) how
to provide a route that meets driver’s individual preferences,
without compromising the traffic efficiency factors such as
travel time and traffic congestion level. We tackle these
challenges using two main components:
1) a driver behavior classifier, which links the driver’s behaviors with the road network attributes using historical
driver data, which helps to identify the individual preferences of the driver based on their driving pattern, and
2) an approach that combines the benefits of GNNs and
DRL to learn an optimal policy for personalized endto-end route selection, with the goal to maximize driver’s
satisfaction while minimizing travel time and mitigating
global congestion on the road network.
The integrated framework combines graph-based learning
and RL, updating both model parameters simultaneously to
create a robust, adaptive system capable of making decisions
based on real-time data from the graph-structured road network. Further, to enhance flexibility and accommodate multiple driver preferences, a generic model is initially trained on
traditional traffic-related factors such as travel time and traffic
congestion. Subsequently, multiple driver preference-oriented
models are trained based on this generic model, each with
satisfaction rewards tailored to different drivers’ preferences.
The framework is designed to receive routing requests from
vehicles in the form of a tuple <source, destination>,

Table I
ROAD NETWORK ATTRIBUTES
Symbols
ρij (t)
Uij (t)
U̇ij (t)
ξij (t)
ψij
χij
ζij
νij
Fij (t)

Description
Occupancy percentage, percentage of road length
occupied by the vehicles on the edge eij
Road usage, number of vehicles on the edge eij
Road speed, average speed of vehicles on the edge eij
Travel time, time taken to travel through the edge eij
Number of lanes on the edge eij
Road length of the edge eij
Road type, structure of the road represented by the edge eij
Road complexity, complex road junctions
such as roundabouts at the vertex j
Future road usage, number of vehicles
that are expected to travel on the road eij

Table II
V EHICLE - RELATED FEATURES TO CLASSIFY DRIVER BEHAVIOR
Symbols

Description

τ
λ
φ
ẍ
ÿ
ϑ
ẋ

Timestamp, denoting the time of the recorded data
Longitudinal position
Lateral position
Longitudinal vehicle acceleration
Lateral vehicle acceleration
Time headway
Longitudinal velocity

aiming to identify routes that connect them while prioritizing
factors such as driver’s satisfaction, global congestion, and
travel time. It is important to note that we approximate the
requested route as a junction closest to the driver’s starting
point (referred to as the source junction) to the destination
junction closest to the desired destination point.
A. System model
We represent the road network as a directed graph
G=(V, E), where the vertex set V represents the roads junctions and the edge set E models the roads connecting two
road junctions. As an example, edge eij =(vi , vj ) corresponds
to the road connecting the junctions i and j. A route R= <
eij , ejk , . . . > is a list of edges connecting a sequence of road
junctions, where consecutive edges share a vertex. Each edge
carries a set of attributes that represent the current state of
the network. Table I summarizes the road network attributes
between vertices i and j at any given time t.
The vehicle-related features are extracted from historical
driving data to classify the driver’s behavior and provide
personalized routing solutions that align with their preferences.
Table II summarizes the features utilized to classify and
associate the driver’s behavior with the road attributes.
B. Characterizing the driver’s behavior and preferences
In the context of route planning, there are several approaches to factoring in the driver’s preferences to provide
personalized routes for drivers [11, 12]. In our study, we
analyze the driver’s behavior by considering both static and
dynamic environmental attributes, to identify their preferred
route.

We build upon the work by Takahashi et al. [34], which also
divides the environmental attributes into static and dynamic.
The static elements comprise the information related to the
physical topology of the road, e.g., road length and number
of lanes. The dynamic elements represent temporal attributes
such as the current traffic situation, accidents, or weather.
Among them, we select four major attributes to represent
the road environmental vector hij (t), which contains information about both the physical road topology and the dynamic
information associated with any given edge eij . The road
environmental vector is defined as
hij (t),{ζij , ψij , νij , κij (t)},
where the vector components are as defined above.
The road environment vector conveys information about
the road or edges, including factors such as road type ζ,
number of lanes ψ, road complexity ν, and current traffic
conditions κ(t)∈[low, high]. To match these attributes with
individual preferences, we study how drivers behave on roads
with specific attribute combinations, gaining insights into their
preferences and tendencies. To understand driver preferences,
we leverage the driver’s historical data and associate them
with the corresponding road environmental vector h to define the driving preference vector p. Subsequently, the road
characteristics associated with the normal driver’s behavior are
identified as the preferred attributes for travel.
Figure 1 illustrates the process of identifying the driver’s
preference vector. Initially, we extract edge information from
the road network database. For each edge, we utilize the
(ẍ, ÿ, ϑ, ẋ) parameters to classify the driver behavior Be .
Once the driving behavior is determined, the driver preference
identifier utilizes the road attributes vector H for each edge
and associates them with the driving behavior. Subsequently,
the preference identifier associates the road attributes vector
with the frequent normal driving behavior, considering it as
the driver’s preference vector p.
C. GNN-based DRL agent
We now describe our GNN-based DRL framework. We
follow a similar approach as described by Almasan et al. [35],
which addresses the optical transport network routing use case.
In a nutshell, the GNN component is used for modeling the
topology and the attributes of the road network as a directed
graph. The latter is then used as environment for the DRL
agent. As mentioned before, we leverage the GIN-E architecture [30] – a variant of GNN that facilitates the information
exchange between the graph vertices, encompassing both node
and edge features. The DRL counterpart utilizes a DQN-based
algorithm [33, 35], which takes the graph-structured network
state as input and predicts an action to determine the route.
The DRL uses the Q-value estimate provided by the GNN,
based on the current network state and learns to minimize the
mean-squared Bellman error (Equation (2)).

history of the driver’s behavior and preferences on the selected
route; (ii) the time taken to reach the destination; and (iii) the
global traffic flow to ensure smooth vehicular mobility in the
considered area. More formally, the reward can be written as:
r(s(t), a(t))=ωp · rp (s(t), a(t)) + ωt · rt (s(t), a(t))
+ ωf · rf (s(t), a(t))

Figure 1. An overview of the driver’s preference identifier.

State space: The DRL state, s(t)∈S, is the network state,
defined by the edge-level features between vertices i and j at
any given time t (see Sec. IV-A), i.e.,
s(t)={ρij (t), Uij (t), U̇ij (t), ξij (t), ψij , χij , ζij , νij , Fij (t)} .
Note that the network state described above comprises all the
main parameters that we are aiming to include in optimizing
the route selection process at the network topology level.
Action space: Upon receiving a route request at time t, the
DRL selects an action, a(t)∈A, with A denoting the set of
end-to-end routes from the requested source to the destination.
Given the complexity of the network topology, the number of
feasible route options from a source to a destination may be
very high. Since estimating the Q-values for every possible
combination could significantly affect policy convergence, we
limit the action space A to a set of K candidate routes. The
value of K is a tunable hyperparameter aimed to achieve a
good trade-off between the optimal route selection and the
complexity to evaluate all the feasible routes (i.e., from source
to destination) [35]. Based on the current travel time, we
determine the K candidate paths for each source-destination
pair from a set of feasible routes. The selected route is
expressed in the network state by an attribute named "selected
path", using an indicator function takes 1 for the selected edges
and 0 for the others. The DRL then estimates the Q-value
based on the updated network states, learning to maximize
cumulative rewards.
Reward components: We define the reward, i.e., the numerical value received from the environment as feedback for the
DRL agent’s action, as a multi-objective function. It comprises
three components: (i) the driver’s satisfaction, based on the

(3)

where ωp , ωt , and ωf are weighting coefficients and
rp (s(t), a(t)), rt (s(t), a(t)), and rf (s(t), a(t)) are the reward
components representing driver satisfaction, time-taken to
reach the destination, and global traffic flow at time step t,
respectively. Each component allows values in the range [0,1].
Driver satisfaction: The driver satisfaction reward component has been formulated to provide a high reward for routing
the vehicle along roads (edges) that are aligned with the
driver’s preference vector p derived from the driver’s behavior.
It is not always possible to identify a route that solely caters
to the driver’s routing choice; therefore, to encourage the DRL
to choose a route with road attributes similar to the driver’s
preferences, we utilize the weighted cosine similarity score,
Sc , to model the reward component. Sc between the driver’s
preference p and the road attributes h is calculated for each
edge along the selected route. Moreover, it is possible to assign
priority factors to specific elements of the driver’s preference
vectors, indicating which elements must correspond with road
attributes during the route selection process. Based on these
priority factors, a list of values Sp is generated: A value of 1
indicates that the preference vector element mentioned in the
priority factor aligns with the corresponding road attribute. The
similarity value (Se ) is computed for each edge in the selected
route, and the mean of these values corresponds to the driver’s
satisfaction reward. Finally, the driver’s satisfaction reward is
formulated as
Se = min(mean(Sp ), Sc )

(4)

rp (s(t), a(t))=mean(Se ) .

(5)

Time to reach the destination: This reward is modeled using
an error function erf between the ideal time and the actual time
to reach the destination from the source node. The ideal time
Ti is computed based on the distance between each node pair
from the source to destination with the speed limit specified
between them. Note that the ideal time does not account for
the time to cross the junction or the waiting period at the
traffic lights. The actual time Ta , instead, is calculated based
on the current average speed along the route, which includes
the current traffic conditions as well. The reward function is
designed to provide the maximum reward if Ta =Ti ; however,
the function is also modeled to provide a lower reward even
if they reach the destination before the ideal time, so as to
discourage the driver from exceeding the speed limit.
(
a
), Ti ≥Ta
1−erf( Ti T−T
i
(6)
rt (s(t), a(t))=
Ta −Ti
1−erf( Ti ), Ta >Ti .
Global traffic flow: The occupancy percentage ρij for each
edge ij in the road network is obtained by calculating the

Episodic average reward

Episodic average reward

0.775

0.80

0.750

0.75

0.725

0.70

0.700

0.65

0.675

0.60

0.650

0.55

Episodic avg. reward
Moving avg. reward

0.50
0

500

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500

Training episodes

Episodic avg. reward
Moving avg. reward

0.625
0.600
0

20

40

60

80

100

Evaluation episodes

120

Figure 3. GNN-DRL learning progress: Mean reward trend.

behavior diverges from the behavior previously associated with
the preference vector; (iii) The current route’s traffic condition
has changed, causing a significant delay in the estimated time
of arrival compared to the ideal time.
Figure 2. An overview of the proposed GNN-based DRL framework.

V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

length of vehicles on the road along with their minimum
gap, divided by the road length. The occupancy percentage
represents the current global traffic flow. To avoid congestion,
the DRL is encouraged to route the vehicle through less
crowded routes by providing a reward based on the global
mean occupancy rate as

We evaluated the performance of the proposed framework
using a real-world road network with mobility traces sampled
from the Luxembourg SUMO Traffic (LuST) Scenario [14].
We extracted a portion of the Luxembourg road network that
comprises 44 intersections and 122 roads, with 5 intersections
containing traffic lights. We selected an 8:00am morning rush
hour scenario for training, while the inference phase utilized
data from the 1:00pm and 6:00pm datasets, corresponding to
the afternoon and evening rush hours, respectively.

rf (s(t), a(t))=1−mean(ρij ) .

(7)

Learning process: The learning process comprises two
steps. First, a generic GNN-based DRL model is trained
with global traffic flow and time-to-reach-destination reward
components, focusing solely on traffic route optimization. The
rationale behind this choice is to establish a generic model
that addresses the core process of route optimization, namely,
traffic route optimization. Second, to accommodate personalized and context-aware factors, the generic model is further
trained to consider the driver’s satisfaction reward component,
referred to as driver preference models. This two-step learning
process provides us with the flexibility to incorporate different
variations of driver’s preference vectors P on top of the basic
routing functionalities provided by the generic model. Since
multiple driver preference models are trained, an identifier is
necessary to select the appropriate DRL model as per the
requesting driver’s preferences. Hence, during the inference
phase, we employ a cosine similarity scoring function to map
trained models to driver’s preferences. Then we select a model
with an environment attribute vector hv that is similar to the
driver’s preferences pv , and the selected model is used to
determine the most suitable routes for the driver. Figure 2
outlines the proposed GNN-based DRL framework.
The framework constantly monitors real-time data from the
vehicle and the current traffic congestion status to change the
route if necessary. The suggested route is re-planned if any of
the three following conditions are satisfied: (i) Driver deviates
from the suggested route; (ii) Real-time estimation of driver’s

A. Model pre-training
Initially, the generic model is trained solely using time to
reach the destination and global traffic flow reward components to find the optimal route based on time and congestion
levels. Once the generic model achieves satisfactory and
consistent rewards, the best-performing model is selected and
further trained to incorporate driver’s satisfaction rewards to
determine personalized routes. In both steps, we run the GNNbased DRL framework for 150 steps per simulation episode,
meaning that 150 vehicles are introduced into the road network
with source and destination nodes randomly sampled from the
road network. The training process is repeated until stable
and reasonable rewards are achieved. Additionally, we freeze
the learning process every 30 episodes during training, and
conduct five evaluation episodes to assess the generic agent’s
performance. In both pre-training and training concerning
driving preferences, the number of candidate paths (k) is set at
4. During training, the DQN utilizes an ǫ-greedy exploration
process to encourage the agent to explore the action space
and avoid local minima. The ǫ value gradually decreases as
the training progresses.
As depicted in Figure 3, training process comprises of 3,500
episodes with weighting coefficients ωp =0, ωt =0.7, ωf =0.3
corresponding to the reward components defined in Equation (3). During training, the generic agent achieved an average
episodic reward of 0.7. The fluctuations in the training rewards
indicate that the ǫ-greedy exploration effectively explores

0.85

Episodic average reward

Scenario 1

Source

0.66

0.80

0.64

0.75

0.62

0.70

0.60

0.65

0.58
0.56

Episodic avg. reward
Moving avg. reward
0

500

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

Model 1 Training episodes

Episodic avg. reward
Moving avg. reward

0.60
0

500

1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

Model 2 Training episodes

Scenario 2

Destination
0 10m

Figure 5. GNN-DRL learning progress: Mean reward trend with driver
preferences. DP M − V 1 (Left) considers [straight, two, simple, low] as
the preference vector, DP M − V 2 (Left) considers [straight, one, simple,
low] as the preference vector.

Figure 4. Route selection considering traffic light phases.

the action space, while the evaluation episode rewards are
relatively stable. During the inference phase, we chose the
best model and ran 5 episodes with different random seeds,
resulting in the agent achieving average rewards of 0.76 and
0.77 for the afternoon and evening traffic data, respectively.
As a performance metric, we calculated the median difference
between the expected and ideal travel time (Ti ) from the
source to the destination, which is 24 s (afternoon) and 23 s
(evening). Furthermore, compared to the shortest distancebased approach, our framework show an improvement of
33% (afternoon) and 46% (evening) in the mean time difference. Additionally, the cumulative distribution function (not
included in the paper due to space constraints) underlines
that, on average between afternoon and evening data, the time
difference is less than 22 s for 80% of instances in case of
the generic model, whereas it is 46 s for the distance-based
approach, thus indicating longer waiting time.
To further evaluate the chosen model, we selected a specific
source and destination node for a routing request, with a traffic
light positioned between them. In the first scenario (Figure 4
labeled as scenario 1), the traffic light displays a red signal,
and it is estimated to take another 120 seconds for the light to
turn green. Therefore, instead of opting for a direct path, an
alternative path with a shorter estimated travel time is chosen
to avoid the waiting time. In the second scenario (Figure 4
labeled as scenario 2), although the traffic light is still red,
the estimated time for the green light is less than 20 s. Consequently, a shorter path is chosen compared to the first scenario.
These outcomes demonstrate the advantage of incorporating
dynamic traffic-related features into the framework to select
the most suitable path between the source and destination.
B. Training driver’s preferences
As the second step in the training process, the selected
generic model is further trained to accommodate driver preferences with weighting coefficients ωp =0.6, ωt =0.3, ωf =0.1,
accounting for driver’s satisfaction, time, and congestion reward, respectively. In this case, we trained two
driver preference-based models (in short DP M ) with

variations of the driver preference vector P representing road type, number of lanes, road complexity, and
traffic condition: (i) [straight, two, simple, low], and (ii)
[straight, one, simple, low]. The first variation, represented as
DPM-V1, prefers straight roads with two lanes, simple intersections, and low traffic, while the second variation (DPMV2) opts for single-lane over two-lane roads. Additionally, the
driver’s satisfaction reward is designed to prioritize road type
and the number of lanes, while road complexity and traffic
condition were given lower priority. For the training process,
training was conducted for 3,000 episodes with evaluations
every 30 episodes, similar to the first case. Figure 5 shows the
training progress of the second step. As in the first case, the
best model was selected based on the reward value during the
inference phase, focusing on the evening rush hour.
During the inference phase, DPM-V1 and DPM-V2 achieve
mean driver’s satisfaction rewards of 0.58 and 0.80, respectively. In comparison, routes chosen by DPM-V1 and DPM-V2
contain edges with similarity value greater than 0.5, (Se >0.5)
21% of the time and 72% of the time (resp.). The lower
similarity reward of DPM-V1 is due to the fewer number
of two-lane roads (40) compared to single-lane roads (68)
in the road network. Moreover, the driver preference-based
agent had to select a route from k candidate paths that
balance both travel time and driver satisfaction; thus, it is
challenging for DPM-V1 to choose a route with preferred
attributes without compromising the travel time reward. Even
when the number of candidate paths (k) is increased from 4
to 5, the mean driver satisfaction reward remains at 0.58 for
DPM-V1 and 0.81 for DPM-V2, suggesting that expanding the
action space to account for more routes does not necessarily
lead to better outcomes. When compared to the generic model,
DPM-V1 show a 17% improvement in selecting preferred
routes, while DPM-V2 achieves a 7% improvement. The
minor improvement by DPM-V2 is because the road network
attributes predominantly align with its preferences. In terms
of computation time, averaging over 750 steps, it takes about
0.16 s to identifying a route per source-destination request.
To compare the routes chosen by the two models, identical
source and destination pairs were selected to determine the
route. As depicted in Figure 6, DPM-V1 (brown path) selected

Scenario 1

selecting routes aligned with driver’s preferences compared to
the generic model, which focuses on traditional traffic factors,
and a decrease in the travel time by up to 46% relatively to the
shortest distance-based approach. Future work will focus on
improving the action space of the DRL to enhance the route
selection process and the driver’s preference vector to encompass additional relevant road attributes. Additionally, larger
road networks will be employed to assess the computational
efficiency and scalability of the proposed framework.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Scenario 2

This work was supported in part by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under
Grant No. 101069688 (CONNECT) and by MAAS4Italy Programme (PNC-A.1-N1) under ToMove Project. The findings
reported reflect the work, and are solely under the responsibility of the authors.
R EFERENCES

Figure 6. Route selection for reaching the destination while considering driver
preferences, demonstrated through two scenarios. In both scenarios, DPM-V1
opts for the brown path, while DPM-V2 selects the black path.

the path with two lanes, whereas DPM-V2 (black path) chose
the route with a single lane to reach the same destination, indicating personalized routes catering to the driver’s preferences
as expected. Although this work presents only two models,
multiple variations can be trained atop the generic model based
on preference vectors.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
We presented a framework for a personalized and contextaware route planner that integrates driver preferences into
route selection using a novel GNN-based DRL framework.
We exploited the advantages of GNNs by representing road
network data as graph-structured data and employed reinforcement learning to learn the dynamics of the environment. GNN
leverages the message-passing process to share road network
attributes across multiple nodes of the graph efficiently and
collaborates with DRL to identify optimal routing paths,
guided by reward components focused on driver’s satisfaction,
travel time, and congestion. The framework offers flexibility
to train multiple preference variations and assign importance
to each preference factor as per the driver’s wish. We evaluated the proposed approach with a realistic road network
extracted from the LuST scenario, showing that the framework
effectively learns the driver’s preferences. Specifically, the
driver’s preferences models showed up to 17% improvement in

[1] World urbanization prospects: The 2018 revision.
Technical report, United Nations.
URL
https://population.un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-Report.pd
[2] A european strategy on cooperative intelligent
transport systems, a milestone towards cooperative,
connected and automated mobility.
Technical
report, European Commission, 2016.
URL
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A520
[3] Christoph Sommer and Falko Dressler. Vehicular Networking. Cambridge University Press, 2014. ISBN 9781-107-04671-9. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107110649.
[4] Marco Autili, Lei Chen, Cristofer Englund, Claudio
Pompilio, and Massimo Tivoli. Cooperative Intelligent
Transport Systems: Choreography-Based Urban Traffic
Coordination. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 22(4):2088–2099, April 2021. ISSN
1558-0016. doi: 10.1109/tits.2021.3059394.
[5] Dinesh Cyril Selvaraj, Shailesh Hegde, Nicola Amati,
Francesco Deflorio, and Carla Fabiana Chiasserini. An
ml-aided reinforcement learning approach for challenging vehicle maneuvers. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Vehicles, 8(2):1686–1698, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TIV.2022.
3224656.
[6] Qin Liu, Panlin Hou, Guojun Wang, Tao Peng, and
Shaobo Zhang. Intelligent route planning on large road
networks with efficiency and privacy. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 133:93–106, November
2019. ISSN 0743-7315. doi: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2019.06.012.
[7] Sven Schoenberg and Falko Dressler. Reducing Waiting
Times at Charging Stations with Adaptive Electric Vehicle Route Planning. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Vehicles, 8(1):95–107, January 2023. ISSN 2379-8904.
doi: 10.1109/TIV.2022.3140894.
[8] Global traffic scorecard. Technical report, Inrix. URL
https://inrix.com/scorecard/.
[9] Traffic-related air pollution: A critical review
of the literature on emissions, exposure, and

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

health effects: Executive summary.
Technical [21] Richard Bellman. On a routing problem. Quarterly of
report,
Health
Effects
Institute.
URL
Applied Mathematics, 16(1):87–90, 1958. ISSN 1552https://www.healtheffects.org/system/files/SR17TrafficReview_Exec_Summary.pdf.
4485. doi: 10.1090/qam/102435.
Falko Dressler. Cyber Physical Social Systems: Towards [22] Yan Ding, Chao Chen, Shu Zhang, Bin Guo, Zhiwen Yu,
Deeply Integrated Hybridized Systems. In IEEE ICNC
and Yasha Wang. GreenPlanner: Planning personalized
2018, pages 420–424, Maui, HI, March 2018. IEEE. doi:
fuel-efficient driving routes using multi-sourced urban
10.1109/ICCNC.2018.8390404.
data. In IEEE PerCom 2017, Kona, HI, March 2017.
Jian Dai, Bin Yang, Chenjuan Guo, and Zhiming Ding.
IEEE. doi: 10.1109/percom.2017.7917867.
Personalized route recommendation using big trajectory [23] Emmanouil Koukoumidis, Li-Shiuan Peh, and Mardata. In IEEE ICDE 2015, Seoul, South Korea, April
garet Rose Martonosi. SignalGuru: leveraging mobile
2015. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/icde.2015.7113313.
phones for collaborative traffic signal schedule advisory.
Abdalla Abdelrahman, Amr S. El-Wakeel, Aboelmagd
In ACM MobiSys 2011, Bethesda, MD, June 2011. ACM.
Noureldin, and Hossam S. Hassanein. Crowdsensingdoi: 10.1145/1999995.2000008.
Based Personalized Dynamic Route Planning for Smart [24] Yaguang Li, Han Su, Ugur Demiryurek, Bolong Zheng,
Vehicles. IEEE Network, 34(3):216–223, May 2020.
Tieke He, and Cyrus Shahabi. PaRE: A System for PerISSN 1558-156X. doi: 10.1109/mnet.001.1900368.
sonalized Route Guidance. In WWW 2017, Perth, AusAllan M. de Souza, Torsten Braun, Leonardo C. Botega,
tralia, April 2017. ACM. doi: 10.1145/3038912.3052717.
Leandro A. Villas, and Antonio A. F. Loureiro. Safe [25] Daniele Quercia, Rossano Schifanella, and Luca Maria
and Sound: Driver Safety-Aware Vehicle Re-Routing
Aiello. The shortest path to happiness: recommending
Based on Spatiotemporal Information. IEEE Transbeautiful, quiet, and happy routes in the city. In ACM
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 21(9):
HT 2014, New York City, NY, September 2014. ACM.
3973–3989, September 2020. ISSN 1558-0016. doi:
doi: 10.1145/2631775.2631799.
10.1109/tits.2019.2958624.
[26] Aleksandr I. Panov, Konstantin S. Yakovlev, and Roman
Lara Codecá, Raphaël Frank, Sebastién Faye, and
Suvorov. Grid Path Planning with Deep ReinforceThomas Engel. Luxembourg SUMO Traffic (LuST)
ment Learning: Preliminary Results. Procedia Computer
Scenario: Traffic Demand Evaluation. IEEE IntelliScience, 123:347–353, 2018. ISSN 1877-0509. doi:
gent Transportation Systems Magazine, 9(2):52–63, April
10.1016/j.procs.2018.01.054.
2017.
ISSN 1939-1390.
doi: 10.1109/mits.2017. [27] Jiuxia Zhao, Minjia Mao, Xi Zhao, and Jianhua Zou.
2666585.
A Hybrid of Deep Reinforcement Learning and Local
Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, Jakob Erdmann,
Search for the Vehicle Routing Problems. IEEE Transand Daniel Krajzewicz. SUMO - Simulation of Urban
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 22(11):
MObility: An Overview. In SIMUL 2011, Barcelona,
7208–7218, November 2021. ISSN 1558-0016. doi:
Spain, October 2011.
10.1109/tits.2020.3003163.
Ankur Sarker, Haiying Shen, and Kamran Kowsari. [28] Kun Lei, Peng Guo, Yi Wang, Xiao Wu, and Wenchao
A Data-Driven Reinforcement Learning Based MultiZhao. Solve routing problems with a residual edge-graph
Objective Route Recommendation System. In IEEE
attention neural network. Neurocomputing, 508:79–98,
MASS 2020, Delhi, India, December 2020. IEEE. doi:
October 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2022.08.005.
10.1109/mass50613.2020.00023.
[29] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang,
Daniel L. Guidoni, Guilherme Maia, Fernanda S. H.
Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng
Souza, Leandro A. Villas, and Antonio A. F. Loureiro.
Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review
Vehicular Traffic Management Based on Traffic Engiof methods and applications. AI Open, 1:57–81, 2020.
neering for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks. IEEE AcISSN 2666-6510. doi: 10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001.
cess, 8:45167–45183, 2020. ISSN 2169-3536. doi: [30] Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik,
10.1109/access.2020.2978700.
Percy Liang, Vijay Pande, and Jure Leskovec. Strategies
Juan Pan, Iulian Sandu Popa, Karine Zeitouni, and
for Pre-training Graph Neural Networks. In ICLR 2020,
Cristian Borcea. Proactive Vehicular Traffic Rerouting
Virtual Conference, April 2020.
for Lower Travel Time. IEEE Transactions on Vehicu- [31] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie
lar Technology, 62(8):3551–3568, October 2013. ISSN
Jegelka. How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks? In
1939-9359. doi: 10.1109/tvt.2013.2260422.
ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, May 2019.
Jin Y. Yen. An algorithm for finding shortest routes [32] Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. Qfrom all source nodes to a given destination in general
learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):279–292, May 1992.
networks. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 27(4):526–
ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/bf00992698.
530, 1970. ISSN 1552-4485. doi: 10.1090/qam/253822. [33] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver,
E. W. Dijkstra. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion
Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and
with Graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1(1):269–271,
Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with Deep ReinforceDecember 1959. doi: 10.1007/BF01386390.
ment Learning. cs.LG 1312.5602, arXiv, December 2013.

[34] Tomoaki Takahashi, Lin Teng, Takashi Izumi, and Hiroto
Seki. An examination of Route Search considering the
individual driver preferences. In IEEE FUZZ-IEEE 2015,
Istanbul, Turkey, August 2015. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/
fuzz-ieee.2015.7337894.
[35] Paul Almasan, José Suárez-Varela, Krzysztof Rusek, Pere
Barlet-Ros, and Albert Cabellos-Aparicio. Deep reinforcement learning meets graph neural networks: Exploring a routing optimization use case. Elsevier Computer
Communications, 196:184–194, December 2022. ISSN
0140-3664. doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2022.09.029.

