2023 IEEE 26th International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)
24-28 September 2023. Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain

Research on travel paths based on car-hailing services connecting
with rail transit

2023 IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) | 979-8-3503-9946-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ITSC57777.2023.10421829

Yajie Song, Zhijian Wang, Ruoyu Wang
Abstract— Urban rail transit has become the primary mode
of transportation for most commuters, while car-hailing services
have gained popularity as a new transportation option in recent
years. Based on the relatively stable scheduling of subway trains
and the distribution patterns of car-hailing services, this study
proposes a combination of car-hailing services and rail transit
for efficient travel. By analyzing and processing car-hailing
passenger flow data, extracting origin-destination (OD) pairs,
and constructing road network information, the study
determines the attraction areas of rail transit stations. An
improved Sarsa algorithm is employed to search for optimal
travel paths based on the principle of connection travel,
providing passengers with better travel decision-making.
Compared to the Q-learning algorithm, the Sarsa algorithm
demonstrates a 35% improvement in convergence speed, an
11% reduction in optimal path length, and an 8% decrease in
minimum travel costs. Sarsa exhibits stronger adaptability to
complex and unknown environments.

I. INTRODUCTION
Urban rail transit is the preferred mode of transportation
for most commuters due to its extensive coverage, moderate
pricing, stable operation, and strong timeliness. Car-hailing
services have also witnessed significant growth worldwide,
providing residents with more diverse travel options and
greatly improving the convenience of their commutes. They
effectively address the challenges of the "last mile" problem in
transportation for residents. However, in the current
transportation system, the existing travel mode still has some
shortcomings.
Urban rail transit is unable to cover every corner of the city,
and a single mode of transportation is insufficient to meet the
diverse needs of commuters. With the continuous increase in
the number of motor vehicles, road expansion has failed to
keep pace with the growing vehicle population, resulting in
severe congestion problems. Congestion during peak hours is
particularly evident, significantly reducing the convenience of
car-hailing services. Moreover, the high cost of car-hailing
services has an impact on residents' choice of travel mode,
especially during nighttime travel when additional charges for
service duration, distance, and other factors come into play.
Although urban rail transit coexists with multiple
transportation modes, the lack of effective integration of
information hinders the seamless connectivity between
different modes of transportation, thus limiting the
attractiveness of urban rail transit itself.
Y. -J. Song, Z. -J. Wang and R. -Y. Wang are with Beijing Key Lab of
Urban Intelligent Traffic Control Technology, North China University of
Technology, Shijingshan District, Beijing, CO 100144, P.R.China (e-mail:
songyajie@mail.ncut.edu.cn).

979-8-3503-9946-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

Currently, research on connecting transportation modes
mainly focuses on the integration of urban rail transit with
other modes of transportation, while there are few studies on
the integration of car-hailing services and urban rail transit.
Chen [1] proposed a calculation model based on IC card data
to calculate indicators such as the proportion of rail transit
connecting to buses and the distance of the connection, and
used this model to calculate the relevant indicators for bus
connections at rail transit stations in Beijing. Yang et al. [2]
established a conventional bus connection distance model
based on the psychological impedance of urban rail transit
travelers and obtained the average connection distance for
car-hailing services and non-motorized vehicles. Path
planning has formed a relatively complete theoretical system
in uncertain environments. In recent years, data-driven
simulation environments have been used to design
reinforcement learning algorithms to solve various
engineering problems, such as robot control and navigation [3],
and path optimization. Q-learning proposed by Watkins [4]
and Sarsa [5] can handle discrete state spaces effectively.
Although extensive research has been conducted in this field,
finding the optimal path in complex environments remains a
challenge. Wen et al. [6] proposed a Multi-Sarsa path planning
algorithm based on a topological graph. It is well known that
local Q-learning can lead to suboptimal global behavior. Some
research has also been done to enhance this aspect of deep
reinforcement learning. Stuart Russell and Andrew L. Zimdars
[7] proposed a new approach called Q-decomposition, which
uses master and sub-agents to construct a new composite agent.
Each sub-agent has a unique reward function and implements
its own reinforcement learning process. Zhao Dongbin [8]
proposed a SARSA-based deep reinforcement learning with
experience replay method. Ozkan et al. [9] analyzed the entire
traffic network using the RL-Q learning algorithm to extract
and rank all paths, capturing the most important route
selection behavior of traffic flow. Li et al. [10] proposed a new
action selection strategy that combines greedy strategy and
Boltzmann probability selection strategy to avoid the standard
Q-learning algorithm from getting trapped in local optima,
which has been widely applied and studied in related fields.
Most of the previous studies have established the urban
road traffic network at the level of a convergence area (or grid),
but ignored the physical network topology. Due to the
characteristics of urban network, the spatial distribution of
travel demand patterns in the grid may exhibit significant
heterogeneity. Therefore, based on the relatively stable
subway train scheduling and the distribution patterns of
car-hailing services, this study adopts a reinforcement learning
approach to investigate the travel paths of car-hailing services
connecting with urban rail transit. Using GPS data from

1686

Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

car-hailing services in Beijing, travel information extraction
and connection path analysis are conducted. The actual road
network is topologically modeled using SUMO, and the Sarsa
algorithm is employed to train the agent, searching for the
optimal paths under different connection modes. This study
aims to provide differentiated services for passengers, saving
travel costs while reducing the overall consumption of urban
transportation resources.
I. DATA ACQUISITION

Figure 2. After Map Matching

A. GPS Data Preprocessing
This study mainly includes vehicle GPS data, actual road
network data, and subway station line data. The vehicle GPS
data is sourced from Beijing's July 2018 GPS data for
car-hailing cars, ranging from longitude 116º2644´ to
116º3376´ and latitude 39º8012´ to 39º8495´. The actual road
network data includes parameters and connectivity
information for various roads in Beijing. The subway station
line data is in the form of a shapefile, containing information
about subway lines and the locations of subway
entrances/exits.
Due to factors such as the accuracy of GPS devices and
signal transmission, some vehicles may have significant errors
in their positioning. Therefore, it is necessary to clean the data
by handling missing values, redundant values, and unrealistic
data. The extraction and filtering of travel origin-destination
(OD) pairs are performed based on the following principles:
•

Selecting data within an appropriate range.

•

Determining passenger boarding and alighting
locations based on the passenger's occupancy status.

•

Retaining travel data with duration between 5min-2h.
Discarding data with excessively short travel
distances.

B. Map Matching
Due to differences in coordinate systems or limitations of
GPS data collection devices, the obtained vehicle trajectory
data may exhibit some coordinate point drift, which does not
align with the actual road network. Therefore, accurately
matching the trajectory points to the actual road network can
significantly improve the data accuracy. In this study, a
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is used to match the offset
data. This model describes a process where a hidden Markov
chain generates a sequence of states, and the state sequence
generates the observed sequence. It is possible to associate a
series of ordered locus points to the actual road network. The
before and after matching vehicle data are shown in Fig.1 and

Figure 1. Before Map Matching

Fig.2, demonstrating that the trajectory points have been
accurately matched to the nearby roads, laying the foundation
for subsequent research.
C. Analysis of Subway Station Attraction Range and
Connection Modes
To explore suitable connection modes for different OD
pairs, it is necessary to analyze the spatial relationship
between each OD points and the subway stations within the
region. Walking is the primary mode for passengers to reach
subway stations. However, beyond a certain range, walking
may not be feasible for reaching the subway station. The
walking distance from the origin to the subway station is an
important factor influencing passenger travel choices.
In this study, we propose a fine-grained analysis within the
regional scope, focusing on the entrances of each metro station
as the center point. A circular buffer zone is established with a
certain radius, which should be determined based on the actual
average distance between subway station entrances in each
city. Referring to the research conducted by Wang et al. [11]
on the attraction range of subway stations, this study selects a
buffer zone radius of 800 meters for subway stations. Based on
the attraction range of subway stations, OD pairs located
within the buffer zone are extracted, and the connection modes
are classified based on the location of the origin point:
•

Former-Car-hailing: When the origin point is outside
the buffer zone and the destination point is within the
buffer zone, passengers take a car-hailing first and
then transfer to the subway.

•

Latter-Car-hailing: When the origin point is within the
buffer zone and the destination point is outside the
buffer zone, passengers take the subway first and then
transfer to a car-hailing.

II. SARSA REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHM
In this study, based on the principles of Markov Decision
Process, Sarsa algorithm, and Q-Learning algorithm (QL), an
improved Sarsa algorithm is proposed. The actual road
network is used as the foundation, and a road network
topology model is established, which serves as the search
environment, and defining the set of available actions for all
travel points. The algorithm can determine the suitable
connection mode for any OD pair based on the position
information of the origin and destination point. With the
attraction range of each metro station taken into account, it
recommends with low cost and searches for the optimal path.
When the algorithm identifies different travel modes, it
applies corresponding reward mechanisms. It uses the

1687
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ε-greedy strategy to select the action for the current state and
progressively searches for the path length, connection mode,
and optimal path for the given OD pair. By utilizing the Sarsa
algorithm, this study aims to optimize the selection of travel
modes for different OD pairs, taking the actual road network
and metro station attraction ranges into consideration. This
approach enables the recommendation of travel options with
minimized costs and the discovery of optimal paths.
A. Status
Based on the actual road network, a two-dimensional plane
map is used to represent the road network as an abstract
topological network. Road intersections and metro stations are
abstracted as nodes. The road network is defined as a directed
graph G = ( J , W , E ) , where J represents the nodes of roads
and metro stations, E represents the connecting arcs between
nodes, W represents the physical length between road nodes.
Road network node and road segment lengths are
attributes of an undirected graph network that do not change
over time. The following assumptions are made:
•

Each car-hailing vehicle on a road can enter and exit
from both ends of the nodes.

•

Distances for left turns, right turns, going straight, or
making U-turns can be ignored.

•

When a car-hailing vehicle departs from any position
on a road, the origin is defined as the nearest road
network node to that point [12].

The state of the agent is defined as the set of all available
nodes in the road network:

S = {J 0 , J1 ,..., J n }.

(1)

Where, J i represents all the road nodes in the network.
B. Action
The actions consist of the set of available actions that the
agent can take in the state, which are the valid actions the
vehicle can choose at each intersection. In a given state, the
vehicle generally has four possible actions: left turn, right
turn, go straight, and reverse. In this study, it is assumed that
when the agent is at any node in the road, it can choose the
next intersection connected to it as the next action [13]. The
set of available actions for each point is defined as follows:
A = { J i : [i → i1 ,..., i → ik ]} .
(2)
Where, J i represents the state of the agent, ik represents
the neighboring nodes in the state J i , and the state and action
together constitute the environment of the agent.

lead to the best future benefits, and the agent has no
opportunity to explore better behaviors. To enhance the
agent's exploration capability in unknown environments, this
study adopts an ε-Greedy strategy for action selection.[14] It
combines the randomness of probability to optimize
exploration and the exploitation of expected reward
estimation, avoiding being trapped in local optima. At each
step, the next action is selected with a probability ε, while
with a probability 1-ε, the action with the highest expected
reward estimation from past experiences is chosen.
argmaxa∈AQ(a ), p :1 − ε
at = 
(3)
random_choose, p : ε .
Where, Q(a ) is the reward estimation value, ε is the
greedy coefficient. Based on the above action selection
strategy, the probability of the agent transitioning from state
to the next state can be expressed as:
K

P( st | s ) = ∑ P(ak ) P( st | s, ak ).

(4)

k =1

Where, ak is the action chosen by the agent in state, and st
is the next state.
D. Reward Mechanism
The reward mechanism in the Sarsa algorithm is based on
the Markov Decision Process (MDP) model. In this process,
the agent interacts with the environment repeatedly and
receives feedback from the environment, which guides the
agent on how to optimize its behavior. Therefore, a reward
function can be defined to indicate the utility obtained by the
agent in each state, thereby determining whether the action
receives positive or negative feedback. In different connection
modes, the rewards from the environment are different. The
reward function is defined as follows:
r1 , S next = S nearest _ station

RFT =
(5)
 µ r1 , S next ≠ S nearest _ station , d next < d now

 µ r2 , S next ≠ S nearest _ station , d next > d now .
r1 , S next = Send

(6)
RLT =  µ r1 , S next ≠ Send , d next < d now
µ r , S ≠ S , d > d .
end
next
now
 2 next
Where, RFT and RLT represents the reward function for
the Former- Car-hailing travel mode and the reward function
for the Latter- Car-hailing travel mode respectively. S next is

the next state of the agent. S nearest _ station is the state of the
nearest subway station. Send is the destination state of the

C. Action selection policy
In the Sarsa algorithm, commonly used search decision
strategies are classified into direct search and indirect search.
Each state-action pair corresponds to a Q-value, and one
action selection scheme is to choose the action corresponding
to the maximum Q-value. However, this action selection
policy has limitations. If the agent always chooses the action
with the current maximum Q-value, it may not necessarily

Figure 3. OD distribution

1688
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

travel. d now is the distance from the current point to the
destination. d next is the distance from the next state to the
destination. µ is the reward transfer coefficient. r1 is a
positive constant, and r2 is a negative constant.
E. Update Rule
The update rule in this study follows the principles of the
Sarsa algorithm to update the Q-table. The update mechanism
is as follows:

Q* ( st , a=
Q( st , at ) + α [ rt + γ Q( st +1 , a ') − Q( st , at ) ]. (7)
t)
Where, Q( st , at ) represents the Q-value for the current state
and action pair. Q( st +1 , a ') represents the Q-value for the
next state and action pair. α is the learning rate, and γ is the
discount factor.
III. NUMERICAL SIMULATION
A. Travel Characteristics Analysis
The study area is the intersection area of Line 4, Line 10,
Line 13, and Line 16 in Haidian District. We extracted the OD
data of car-hailing passengers and visualized it as Fig. 3. The
selected area was divided into grids, and the data volume
within each grid was aggregated. The heatmap of passenger
flow data is shown in Fig. 4. The darkness and lightness of the
colors represent the high and low passenger flow respectively.
Darker colors indicate areas with higher passenger flow, while
lighter colors indicate areas with lower passenger flow. We
can identify the areas with concentrated car-hailing activities
and observe the distribution of passenger flow.
Fig. 5 depicts the distribution of car-hailing demand for
pick-ups and drop-offs during five working days. It is evident
that the car-hailing demand exhibits periodic variations.

Analyzing it on an hourly basis, the fixed nature of commuting
during working time results in a certain regularity in
car-hailing for commuting purposes. It also reflects the
similarity in the patterns of passengers pick-up and drop-off
within the same hour, indicating the temporal periodicity of
car-hailing demand.
B. Simulation Analysis
In this study, the actual road network surrounding the
Haidian District in Beijing is taken as an example to verify the
effectiveness of the algorithm using car-hailing data from July
2018. The road network, based on the actual road
infrastructure, consists of 129 intersections, 17 subway
stations, and 408 road segments. Using the proposed Sarsa
learning algorithm, the environment for the agent is
established as shown in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2.
• Road impedance matrix
In the matrix shown in the Tab. 1, 0-128 represents 129
road nodes, and each road is bidirectional with the same length.
The numbers between two nodes represent the actual distance
between them. For example, the distance from node 0 to node
1 is 191m, and similarly, the distance from node 1 to node 0 is
also 191m. All the diagonal elements are 0, indicating that
there is no distance between the same node. Most of the other
'inf' indicating that the distance between two nodes is infinite,
which means there is no connecting road between them. For
example, the distance from node 0 to node 2 is 'inf', indicating
that there is no feasible route between two points.
Nodes within the attraction range of subway stations
points within the buffer zone.
The road network consists of 17 subway stations, whose
coordinates are the default coordinates in SUMO. After buffer
is set, the attraction range of each subway station is 800 meters.
There’re 79 road nodes located in buffers.
The experimental analysis was conducted with three
different values of p and α as Fig.6. The results indicate that
when p=0.9 and α=0.07, the agent achieves the best
•

TABLE Ⅰ. ROAD IMPEDAMCE MATRIX
Road
impedance
matrix
0
1
2
…
127
128

Junction ID
0

1

2

…

127

128

0
191
inf
…
inf
inf

191
0
434
…
inf
inf

inf
434
0
…
inf
inf

…
…
…
0
…
…

inf
inf
inf
…
0
…

inf
inf
inf
…
inf
0

TABLE Ⅱ. POINTS WITHIN THE BUFFER ZONE
Figure 4. Heat map of passenger flow

Nodes
within
buffer
1
2
3
…
17

Figure 5. Travel Demand

Attributes
Metro station
coordinates

Bagou
(-280.1, 0.76)
Beijing University
East Gate
(180.23, 304.97)
Changchun Road
(-263.76, -285.1)
…
Zhongguancun
(206.27, -154.03)

Attraction area
of subway
station

Nodes ID
within buffer

800m

J62, J63, J67,
J68,
…,
J96,J97

1689
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE Ⅳ. LATTER CAR-HAILING
Latter- Car-hailing
Node ID
Nearest Metro station
Distance to Metro
station(m)
Optimal path
Path length
Price

O2

Junction ID

D2

27
Zhichunlu Station

3
Bagou Station

496.8

1515.7

27>28>Line 10 Zhichunlu -> Line 10 Bagou
Station>20>19>18>17>16>15>14>13>12
7650
15

Figure 6. Pathlength of different α

convergence in terms of reward value, path length, and
learning time. The experimental conditions were set as follows:
discount factor γ=0.9, p=0.9, learning rate α=0.07, maximum
greedy coefficient = 0.9, subway station attraction range =
800m, and training iterations = 200. The simulation
experiments demonstrate that the Sarsa algorithm exhibits
strong adaptability in complex environments, enabling
accurate and efficient path planning in complex environments
and converging to a more stable state.
• Former-Taxi travel mode
For the Former-Taxi travel mode, where the passenger's
origin is beyond the attraction range of the subway station and
the destination is within the attraction range, as shown in Tab.
TABLE Ⅲ. FORMER CAR-HAILING
Former-Car-hailing

O1

11

Node ID
Nearest Metro station
Distance to Metro
station(m)
Optimal path
Path length
Price

Metro Station

Junction ID

Changchunqiao Station
1830.25

D2

35
Wudaokou
Station
484

1>12>13>14>15>Line 10
Changchunqiao>Line 10 Cishousi>Line 6
Huayuanqiao>Line 6 Chegongzhuang>Line
13 Chegongzhuang>Line 13 Wudaokou>35
9180
18

Sarsa

Q-Learning

Figure 7. Former-Taxi Travel path

Metro Route

Metro Station

Sarsa

Q-Learning

Metro Route

Figure 8. Latterer-Taxi Travel path

3. Sarsa algorithm recommends taking a car-hailing car to
connect with the subway. The passenger first takes a
car-hailing to Changchunqiao Station, then takes the optimal
transfer path by subway to Wudaokou Station, and finally
walks to the destination, as shown by the red route in Fig. 7.
• Latter-Car-hailing travel mode
For the Latter-Car-hailing travel mode, the passenger's
origin is within the attraction range of the subway station and
the destination is beyond the attraction range, the Sarsa
algorithm recommends taking the subway to connect with a
car-hailing car. The passenger first walks to Zhichunlu Station,
then takes the optimal transfer path by subway to Bagou
Station, and finally takes a car-hailing car to the destination, as
shown by the red route in Fig. 8. The two algorithms provide
two different routes. Compared to Q-learning algorithm, the
Sarsa algorithm yields a shorter path length. It demonstrates
accurate and rapid path planning in complex environments
and converges to a more stable state. It also exhibits stronger
exploration capabilities in unknown environments.
C. Algorithm Comparison
Comparing Sarsa algorithm and Q-Learning algorithm,
results of reward value, learning time, total path length and
travel time of 200 training times are shown in Fig. 9. and Fig.
10. It can be concluded that Sarsa algorithm has high stability
and fast convergence speed. For reward value and learning
time, Sarsa algorithm has a faster convergence speed, which
reduces 35% training times compared with Q-Learning. The
initial negative reward of Q-Learning reaches -49414, while
that of Sarsa algorithm is only -13760. The longest initial
learning time of Q-Learning is 1200, while the longest
learning time of Sarsa algorithm is only 514. Moreover, the
fluctuation is more stable and the performance is better.
Compared with Q-Learning algorithm, Sarsa can reduce
the optimal path length by 11% and travel cost by 8%. Sarsa
algorithm takes the path of subway into account, so it has a
longer travel time, about 3% increase. However, Q-Learning

1690
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 9. Reward and Learn-Time

algorithm still has slight fluctuations after convergence. Sarsa
algorithm has higher stability, stronger exploration ability
under unknown environment, and certain advantages in travel
cost. Therefore, Sarsa algorithm is more suitable for the
research scenario.[15]
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper first preprocesses and maps the second-to-real
travel data, sets the attraction range for the subway station,
and analyzes the connection. The characteristics of real travel
OD are analyzed, and the connection mode of travel OD is
analyzed. Based on reinforcement learning, an algorithm is
designed to search the short-distance travel routes of online
car-hailing connecting rail transit. Based on the actual road
network, Sarsa algorithm is used to establish the road network
topology model through SUMO, and the optimal routes under
different connection modes are searched.
The effectiveness and feasibility of Sarsa algorithm is
verified in multiple simulation environments with different
scales, scenarios and characteristics. Compared with the QL
algorithm, the convergence speed is increased by 35%, the
optimal path length is reduced by 11%, and the minimum
travel cost is reduced by 8%. The algorithm has stronger
adaptability to complex and unknown environments, and
effectively reduces the number of iterations and time of the
algorithm. We will continue to study the improvement of the
algorithm and improve the convergence speed, so that the
method in this paper can give consideration to the optimality
of the solution and the rapidity of operation, and minimize the
travel cost and time.

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

REFERENCES
[1]

Figure 10. Route Time, Pathlength and Price

X. -B. Chen, et al. “Analysis of connection characteristic between
subway and bus based on IC card data,” Technology & Economy in
Areas of Communications, 2021.
L. Yang, et al. “Transfer Distance of Urban Rail Transit Stations Based
on KLP Model,” Traffic & Transportation,2023.
L. Xie, Y. -S. Miao, S. Wang, et al. “Learning with stochastic guidance
for robot navigation,” IEEE Trans. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, 2021, 32(1), pp.166–176.

[14]
[15]

C. J. C. H. Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards. Ph.D. Thesis,
Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK, 1989.
R. S. Sutton. “Generalization in reinforcement learning: Successful
examples using sparse coarse coding,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 1995,8, pp.27–30.
S. Wen, Y. Jiang, B. Cui, et al. “A Hierarchical Path Planning
Approach with Multi-SARSA Based on Topological Map,” Sensors
2022, 22, pp.2367.
J. S. Russell, A. Zimdars. "Q-decomposition for reinforcement learning
agents." Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML-03). 2003, pp, 656-663.
D. Zhao, H. Wang, K. Shao, et al. “Deep reinforcement learning with
experience replay based on SARSA,” 2016 IEEE symposium series on
computational intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1-6.
M.C. Ozkan, T. Cheng. Understanding Route ChoiceBehaviours Using
Macro-Level Patterns: A Q-LearningApproach. Available at SSRN
4262015.
R. -X. Li, L. Fu, L. -L. Wang, et al. “Improved Q-learning based route
planning method for UAVs in unknown environment,” 2019 IEEE 15th
International Conference on Control and Automation (ICCA). IEEE,
2019, pp. 118-123.
P. Wang, J. -H. Xiao, M. -L. Li. “Analyzing and Predicting Station
Choice Behavior of Subway Passengers,” Journal of University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2022, 51(4), pp. 623-629.
W. Zhang, D. Xia, G. Chang, et al. “APFD: an effective approach to
taxi route recommendation with mobile trajectory big data,” Frontiers
of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering, 2022, 23(10),
pp.1494-1510.
Z. -J. Wang, J. -P. Yang, Q. Zhang, et al. “Risk-Aware Travel Path
Planning Algorithm Based on Reinforcement Learning during
COVID-19,” Sustainability. 2022, 14(20): 13364.
K. Lei, P. Guo, Q. -X. Wang, et al. “End-to-end deep reinforcement
learning framework for multi-depot vehicle routing problem,”
Application Research of Computers, 2022, 39(10), pp. 3013-3019.
S. Rahili, B. Riviere and S. Olivier, et al. “Optimal Routing for
Autonomous Taxis using Distributed Reinforcement Learning,” in
IEEE ICDMW. Singapore, 2018, pp.556-563.

1691
Authorized licensed use limited to: Sejong Univ. Downloaded on July 07,2026 at 14:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

